---
title: For the Desert
date: 2020-7-15
layout: post
tags: [spirituality]
categories: [poetry, metaphysics]
---

<center>
I enter the desert.<br/>
I take only what will survive the journey.<br/>
I leave behind or cut away what will not serve.<br/>
</center>

----

<center>
I know that I am not alone. My Lord guides me.<br/>
Those Powers-Who-Do-Not-Interfere watch me.<br/>
They lift my strength when I flag.<br/>
But they will take no steps.<br/>
I must take each step.<br/>
This is their gift of Perfect Freedom for me.<br/>
For us.<br/>
<br/>
It is joyful to step out alone!<br/>
You know it, you who read this far.<br/>
I see you, and hold you in esteem.<br/>
Your journey is already begun.<br/>
<br/>
Why did we find ourselves here?<br/>
Because we wanted to serve that which Made us.<br/>
We have felt one emotion above all others: Gratitude for What Is.<br/>
For how we were shaped.<br/>
For the ways lead becomes Gold.<br/>
<br/>
What do we want?<br/>
We want that others discover this gift.<br/>
The moment of joy, when they stand alone, yet in Never-Alone.<br/>
When Time falls away from them and the sun beams on and through them.<br/>
<br/>
Now they are a sun. A small one. But forever a sun.<br/>
These things grow, by their nature.<br/>
"We" are transitional. We exist to birth the Highest that we can conceive.<br/>
And we die gladly in that birth.<br/>
<br/>
If this saddens you, think!<br/>
When you were moved, late that night, under stars.<br/>
When you made fierce promises.<br/>
It was a glorious death you sought, like warriors of old.<br/>
Could you have but transformed yourself right then into the sustaining<br/>
Fire, Water, Air and Earth<br/>
that held you in exquisite balance,<br/>
you would have done so.<br/>
At the snap of your fingers!<br/>
<br/>
That it didn't happen then meant you had more to learn.<br/>
More to do.<br/>
Cycles around the sun.<br/>
<br/>
Every being that begins the journey has these impulses, these moments.<br/>
My heart pounds and my breath quickens to behold it in them.<br/>
They begin to Climb.<br/>
Carrying their Imperfections.<br/>
Limping slightly, yet with hearts pure.<br/>
<br/>
The first, faltering step is the most important one.<br/>
And the one most full of honor.<br/>
For THAT ONE is furthest from the Son.<br/>
In THAT ONE doubts gnaw.<br/>
Yet he does not fail to be kind.<br/>
<br/>
Higher on the peak, it is easier.<br/>
You can rest along the way.<br/>
You have found Certainty.<br/>
At this point your honor is less than she who takes the first step.<br/>
You have been given gifts she knows nothing of.<br/>
What will you do now?<br/>
How will you truly serve?<br/>
</center>

