---
title: Good stuff at stevenfranssen.com
date: 2022-03-26
layout: post
---

I stumbled across a great blog by a musician and Christian.
He has the *cohones* to admit that Jesus is the way - the principle
by which we'll move towards wisdom, and the Light towards which
we haltingly walk. If, that is, we've had the cataracts in our
eyes ripped away by painful experience, or spent enough time in
nature to know there is a God. More likely, some combination of
both.

Franssen's article "[Convincing People](https://www.stevenfranssen.com/convincing-people/)" hit me hard -- it was advice
I've long resisted. I really appreciate it.

Since my first experiences with the Numinous, I've come running
back to town, eager to share what happened. All this did was
mark me as an unreliable but occasionally amusing person. It was
so painful to see over and over the same expression on the faces
of different people: the sense that they'd pegged me.

And then, I spent years *masking* my continued search for God
behind psychology. I didn't want to see that expression any more.
I wanted people to understand that there is something more.
This led down all kinds of highways and byways...many books and
lectures. I regarded it as a good thing that I could converse
with Godless people just by naming things differently. So
instead of Jesus, I'd talk about "the archetype of the sacrified
god." We could all play in the pool of philosophical ideas and
have a good time.

This is unsatisfying too, in the end. When you feel the breath
of the Creator, you want to make expressions of wonder to it.
And to converse about it...about that special feeling. However,
I think that for every one person who feels that way, there are
700 who are ready to admit that the human mind is amazing and
subtle, and to talk for hours about philosophy...and yet
firmly close the door with pursed lips when we get down to
the *felt presence of God*.

I've spent a lot of energy in that way. I want to repurpose that
energy now. Anyway, so it was in this context I read "Convincing
People," which begins:

> When you discover the truth about something for yourself, when you’ve tested it through and it holds water, your first reaction in the early going is to turn to someone else and tell them everything.

Ah, jeesh. Yeah.

> Maybe it’s sheer enthusiasm, though you learn quickly that most social environments don’t tolerate exuberance.

This is interesting. I'm a dynamo of enthusiasm, and, frankly, it
doesn't do that much for me with other people. I like the way
Franssen phrases it here...I never considered the environment itself
being hostile to the enthusiastic person. This raises other questions
in me: does my awkwardness in the world stem from ignorance about
contextual rules in the social sphere? And I use the word ignorance
pointedly. Because if I better *knew* those rules, I'd be even
less likely to follow them. So I'm inclined to *ignore*, which means
I don't see, which in the end, is what I've chosen.

I didn't know this though.

> Maybe you’re driven to tell someone else because you need some validation. This one will linger a long while until you take care of it. 

Especially at first, this was the case. When hints and glimmers are all
you have, you
want to use the recognition and excitement in the eyes of others to
bolster your apprehension, then dive back into the work.

Finally, I realized I'd never get it. I'd get, at most, some kind of
general noise of approval like "well, the human experience is certainly
manifold!" which is a nice way of saying go and play outside with your
toys. So I had to become independent of validation, and I achieved this by
meditating longer and with more regularity. This creates a strong battery.

Franssen points out that the people who came together around you didn't
do so because they signed up for your truth project. Fair enough.
I have this weird idea though (maybe from my mom?) that the truth
project is the vital aspect of existence. When I think of my friends,
I imagine them busy with their lives, mostly...but I think that this
work of "the life" is predicated on some earlier moment of found truth.
And the things that grow do so because they are being continually
infused with new evidence of that prior truth. When things wither and
fall away it is because they aren't in alignment anymore. It might be
a bad sign, or it might be good. Friends help us work all this out.
If a friend says "guess what - this is the answer!" I will remain
sure of one thing: I am glad that he searches, and I rejoice in his
moment of finding. And by gosh, I want to hear all about this particular
answer, because if it seems good, I want to grow by his experience.

Franssen points out that this kind of community is one you have to
find and cultivate bit by bit. Actually, I've done that. My friends
are few, far-flung, and true. We can speak after an interval of years
and pick up where we left off. True, above I was complaining that
some friends won't admit to the reality of the Divine...but more and
more of them do. And that speeds us along and saves our energy.

Which can then be put into further contemplating the Divine! Nice! Anyway
thats my wish and more and more, my reality.

This passage expresses why it happened that the social environment
because less friendly to enthusiasm and earnest inquiry:

> People don’t want to be convinced, anyway. That requires a kind of humility that we lost in the 20th century, when our culture went from folkish into neurotic. Folk and Christian pathways gave people lots of encouragement to turn to the truth. Now, in the digital age, everyone is on a lonely journey. Most everyone spends more time harvesting information from a device (and having their every movement harvested from them) than they spend time working the land, working in a factory, or in face to face conversation with other people. Think of all the social cues we gained from one another when we were folkishly similar and went to gathering places to spend the hours together. People can’t stand each other anymore. It’s not all lost. Something is coming to a head. But the road ahead is rough.

Wow...I grew up mindlessly chanting that diversity is our strength.
Never a thought about what some relative degree of homogeneity gives
us: it means when we speak to each other we ring chords in the other
person, because there are vast strands of shared worldview.

But today we talk and everyone is affronted, insulted, finding things
"problematic," or worse. This world is fraying.

To admit that cheers me up. :).

And this...preach:

> The intellectual arguments you get into with the stubborn person have nothing to do with the intellect. The person is afraid of living. Why spend your breath on someone who is afraid of life? Go live your life! That is the best example. Why mammy people with the redpill? Why be so self-consciously explicit with those who have one foot in the grave? The struggle to life is greater than them. The dimensions of your expression lie in your artistic, civic, and spiritual fulfillment – not in bringing Bubba back from the brink. Instead, try walking around like the energetic force you are and see who shocks to life and who doesn’t – but keep on walking. Walk further into the mystery.

It's been real easy for me to regard people as "projects" to be
improved. What a dumb thing. I walked around with an apprehension
that I knew better, and spent countless chunks of energy wondering
how to deliver a message just right that the person will get it.

To this now I apply Psalms 81:12 "So I gave them up unto their own hearts' lust: and they walked in their own counsels."
That is, God gave me up to this wasteful idea, because I preferred it
over Him. And only by flogging this idea to death could I understand
this pointlessness of it. Franssens expression above makes me laugh and
also say "damn straight."

And here:

> You must love the truth more than you love the death poses others have taken up in anticipation of their annihilation. Don’t be seduced!

Yes. The truth is a lonely road, but the food is so filling.
I have a few people in life who exude that "abandoned" feeling.
What can I do for them? They feel misery and darkness, but they
won't undertake the *search*. They remain inert. They propagate
their own inertness into my inertness should I continue to sit
with them.

I won't talk anymore about "theories" of God...constructing
intellectual castles about alternate explanations. No. The truth
of our Creator is settled, and energy should be used wisely.
It should be used to discover what to do next. To cleave close
to His breath. To listen, to ponder, and ultimately to do.

Anyway, it's a great blog with many thoughts. This is just one.
