---
title: Inmates
date: 2022-01-02
layout: post
excerpt: "I was being inconsiderate. I only saw that I, quite an exceptional fellow, was doing a Very Good Thing by being here and Couldn't Possibly Be Expected to get every single arcane rule right from the start."
categories: metaphysics
---

Ponder this thought: **the inmates run the asylum**.

I got some insight into the way I subtly manipulate a
psychological container for my own benefit. First, I express some
weakness, some helplessness. Then, others in the container have to
accomodate me.

I've "polarized" the container, subtly excluding those who won't
accomodate me, and turning those who remain into doctors and guards.
Both professions, despite their apparent strengths of reputation
and legally sanctioned violence are actually quite weak against
a single determined human will.

In truth I'm very capable -- capable enough to manipulate the situation
masterfully to get what I want. Here is a concrete example:

## In the monestary

In the zen monestary in 2017, Gyounin told me the rules around eating
dinner. They were complex. I failed to master them, but felt justified
in my failure because they were simply too ornate. He had to correct
me a few times. Finally, he showed some irritation, and then was
(rightly enough) doubly irritated to discover my self-satisfaction
at failing to get the rule.

I was being inconsiderate. I only saw that
I, quite an exceptional fellow,
was doing a Very Good Thing by being here and Couldn't Possibly Be
Expected to get every single arcane rule right from the start.

Gyounin might allow me that, but it was clear that I planned to give myself
a large amount of time to get the rule. In fact, there was *pleasure* in
expanding that amount of time given for me, because in that space I
held my specialness and contemplated it anew.

Indeed, I used his expressed irritation
as further food for my sense of specialness. "Why must he be so
unreasonable?" I projected into our container, which he could sense,
of course. It was meant for him to sense.

My God...how terrible can we be? (Note this as well...I "spread the blame"
away from myself into a generalized "we"...I pat myself on the back
for my demonstrative humility.)

No. How terrible **I am**.

(Again, I've won: "oh, have brave you are to **go that far**...to point
the finger firmly where it belongs, at yourself personally.)

You see...? There is no end to my **ability to take secret pride in
myself and to configure any relationship container in a fashion that
suits "me," this me who takes the pride.** The container of the moment
is this blog article, into which I've already assigned *you* a role.

(You have no obligation to fit yourself into my conception of you!)

For a great take on the sin of pride, check out the [animated
C.S. Lewis chapter](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5PvcynQD-ag&t=1063s) from *Mere Christianity*. It is really a burrowing sin, always disappearing
behind a screen. It shapes the context so well that any plain speech
about its presence will sound unnecessarily rude.

Anyway, these games go on all the time.

I think this is the reason for **the desert** in the life of the seeker. He
or she sees that they are always weaving a web of intrigue in order to
enlarge the prideful self. The desert is the landscape in which 
those cudgels of manipulation you wield with ancient dexterity
are reduced in number by austerity, and seen more readily.
Whether alone there or in a small, experienced group, there is tremendous
time available to reflect on a small number of interactions.

Only in the desert will we finally know ourselves.

There is a beautiful short film on youtube called [Desert Foreigners](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CMyyUVXKOrI) that I think captures
this quite well. It's about Coptic Christian monks in the Egyptian
desert. Fr. Lazarus Al-Antony says in the film:

> When a monk comes to the solitude of the desert, he does not feel
> oppressed by the emptiness of the place, but he becomes aware that
> he is in a confrontation with the demons that inhabit that space.

I think we bring them with us. Though it's useful to externalize
them. However, Frater Al-Antony identifies Satan in their number --
a primal, elemental "will to the un-good" that predates him.
I simply have no experience of that, and, thank Goodness, my
personal demons are beings threaded-through with those patterns
of pride and laziness that I cannot help but identify entirely
as my own. Therefore I haven't needed to think seriously
about any independent malevolent will. My plate is full!

## Satanic interlude

However...

It does make sense that as your meditation deepens and you
trace complex pattern back to simple beginnings, the discovery
of the will of another at a crucial moment may await. Reality
is a continuous function. There is no "cliff" between any state
or manifestation. So if you are surprised as causes unfold
into effects, then you can usefully linger in that space and look around.

You may find that at an angle, just out of sight...you were observed...and
your inattention was exploited for another's gain.

If the satanic enters our lives, I think this is how it comes.
That being was cast out and down. By necessity, his work must
begin on something like an "atomic" level, and our psyche is the
disputed land. In such a working, a single impure thought
added to a mix will adulterate subsequent thoughts. The
best are thoughts which when read aloud, sound anodyne and
correct, but come wrapped with assumptions. For example, if you
regard another as being unsuitable for a role, the assumption is
that *you* would be better. The satanic entity need do no more
than return a while later and discover a host of additional
useful thoughts which built on that one through the mechanics of
rational thought.

And so...when we say "I am in error!" we are already deep in a
wilderness of error whose origin may stretch back before our
remembered birth. And our own personal stamp is visible throughout.
Considering the vastness of this psychological
space, I ask: is Satan really so ancient? Am I really so young?

## Return to the story

To return to the desert, the demons reside within you, and they are housed
nightly by you. You've made agreements with them. The desert is how you pick
those contracts apart and become free from them.

In my situation with Gyounin, I **finally did some adulting**.

The reason for the complexity of the eating ritual is that
it's designed to allow the monks to continue their meditation
through the meal and on into whatever comes next. If everything goes
by rote...if no flicker of consciousness is needed to make small
decisions or engage in distracting eye-contact, then important
internal work with God may continue undisturbed.

This, I finally realized, is an expression of **true manners**. Of deepest
hospitality. Of the deepest wish that whoever came here *may be able
to achieve what they came to do*, for who knows in what hour they
may meet success?

Then I could see my shame.

I spent time practicing the ritual alone. Finally I mastered it,
and this was a small but good thing. I had passed a test.

It's strange though, that I can only see the full story years later.
In the intervening time, I had the outline of the truth, but still
preferred to draw some particulars with my own brush. In particular
I kept the feeling that Gyounin was slightly more irritated than necessary.
And it is this that has changed. Now, I would tell him to be more
angry.

Because I was really being rude. I was already decorating the space
with my own ideas and trying to force accomodation. That is...uff!
Well...I'm sorry now.

If I look at things with me now, I live in something like a
desert. Parents dead, siblings on the other side
of the world. No longer working (so much, anyway). I
am anonymous to my neighbors (though they are kind). The patter of
German in the street is untranslated by me.
I love my life, and despite my "high and lonely talk" in the
sentences above, I have a loving and supportive life partner. Still,
...I see that I want to contemplate in silence, and to disentangle
the threads of error.  It is better that I
live as simply as possible.

In this expression there is also pride. But I offer it anyway because
it is interesting to observe your environment and ask yourself
how it serves you. You may find that some of the things that
"irritate" you are actually serving you. Some of your pleasures
are obfuscated.

The asylum will disband when the inmates wake up and do their duties
without complaint. When they stop picking at scabs. When they
are helpful rather than harmful to the common good. There may be
some struggle, because guards don't know what to do with themselves
when deprived of their role. In fact, that is how they were
so easily enticed into taking it up.

