---
title: Östlicher Schoßkopf, "Goedeker" (attempt)
date: 2007-6-7
category:
  - climbing
layout: post
guests:
  - Daniel
elevation: 1100
location:
  - Östlicher Schoßkopf
---

### Östlicher Schoßkopf, "Goedeker"
_June 7, 2007_

On the face of it, this route looked within our capabilities: 15 pitches, grade
V, mostly easier. The book said that most belays were bolted. After a longish
hike up to the base of the wall, I started up a grade II-III ramp, and finally
built a belay at 60 meters around a block. Daniel came up, appalled at the
looseness of the rock. Then Daniel led a 40 meter pitch right, then up and back
left. This was a serious test for him, as it was pretty easy, but also loose
and without protection. He went up well though. We had a humorous shouting
match while he tried to explain that I should climb even though he couldn't
pull the rope up through the terrible drag. Eventually I figured it out and
coiled the rope around me and soon stood beside him. Daniel complained mightily
about the loose rock! He built a belay around a latschen bush, and really
thought the whole enterprise was beyond the pale. Indeed, we had wandered
slightly off route on that pitch, but soon I reached the "great terrace" and
recognized the route ahead. 

Here I wasted some time trying to find a belay. First I climbed up a gully a
ways, changed my mind, and went up the gully on the left (grade IV+ climbing to
get in). I thought I recognized a pod in this gully from a photo taken on the
route. But climbing up into it there was just a really thin sanduhr to belay
from, not good. I then looked above the pod and unwittingly knocked off a pile
of perched blocks. "Rock!" Daniel later said it came pretty close to him at the
belay. I downclimbed, and up into the gully on the right (again), where I built
a nut and cam belay in a solid crack. Now the real climbing will begin, I
thought.

But Daniel came up, and not encouraged by the lack of bolts, he went around to
the left to look just in case somehow I was off route. It was a good idea, but
as I stood there and looked at the photo, I was more sure I was in the right
place. But when Daniel called that he found lots of bolts and little arrows
drawn on the rock, I pretty much had to dismantle my belay and go over. We were
taking too long anyway, I suspected it was time to go home.

Indeed, there were lots of bolts but it wasn't our route, and we knew nothing
about things over here. We went to the far side of a level terrace, festooned
with bolts for some reason. We decided to try rappelling down from here. I had
a bad feeling about it, so I took Daniel's prussiks with me as I dropped over
the edge. I came into an enormous amphitheater on a free hanging rappel for the
entire length of the rope. The ropes were touching rock right at the bottom,
but I couldn't judge the angle of the rock. With no bolts or stations around, I
realized I would need to reclimb the rope. What a strange place...

So I prussiked back up the 15 meters or so I had gone down. Boy, it took a
while. At the top I insisted that we downclimb our route, or follow ledges
further north if it was easier. We put one rope away, and simul-climbed placing
occasional protection. This worked quickly and easily, and we did find an
easier way down on ramps and gullies. Yay! Didn't have to leave any gear!

Alas, a climb that ended before we made any actual "climbing moves", but still
a good learning experience for Daniel. I got some prussiking practice too. We
went home, enjoying a nice cold drink from a stream.

Looking back I think we could have succeeded on the climb. But without bolted
belays to provide a feeling of security, the will just wasn't there. The rock
wasn't encouraging either. Oh well.
