---
title: Theron's account of the Ptarmigan Traverse
date: 2003-8-13
report: no
layout: post
category: climbing
---

*Theron's old site is off-line. I wrested this beautiful account from the Wayback
Machine.*

## Day One

This weeklong trip into the Cascades was indeed a classic.  We planned six days
for the traverse which included various summits as well and, amazingly, we
stuck very close to our itinerary.  The Ptarmigan traverse is about a 25-mile
north to south direct jaunt from Cascade Pass to the Downey Creek trailhead.
The original pioneering party traveled south to north, but the best route is
undoubtedly in the opposite direction.  This way, you get to look directly at
the big, scary, ice-clad north faces of the mountains along the way.  This is
indeed the most common direction that trekkers take today.  We left Monday
morning very early and dropped Michael's car off at Downey Creek, then took my
car the long way back and around up to Cascade Pass.  The car shuttle is a bit
of a drawback but is worth it in the end since you're on new terrain
constantly.  We finally started hiking around 10:45.  It was a really clear day
that promised to be really hot.  Our packs were jam packed, mostly with food,
but overall were quite light and small.

{% image /cmaimages/2003/theron-pass.jpg %}
*Approaching Cascade Pass with Eldorado Peak in the background*

Big switchbacks on a really popular trail brought us to the pass where there
was a very large party (or multiple parties) resting.  We took our first break
at a spot about 100 feet beyond the pass where an uninhibited deer joined us
for a while.  We spied several small parties heading up Sahale Peak as well
today.  This is quite a popular place - and this day was a Monday.  From here,
we still could not see around to Cache Glacier and the way to Cache Col.
Continuing up, we entered a long section of steep and loose scree, but still
with a reasonable trail.  After crossing a steep snowfield and climbing up some
even steeper scree, we were able to see Cache Glacier.  We took a break at the
base of the glacier and then took out our cups and started the popular
tradition of "dipping our cups" in the various snowmelt and falls coming off
the glacier.  We kept small cups hanging conveniently on our packs.  This way,
we didn't have to fill up our water bottles and could save them for when water
wasn't available, and we were able to drink our fill quite confident that the
water was pure.

{% image /cmaimages/2003/theron-sahale.jpg %}
*The view back on Cascade Pass with Forbidden and Sahale Peaks in the background*

{% image /cmaimages/2003/theron-cache.jpg %}
*At the base of Cache Glacier*

We started up the Cache Glacier and after a couple hundred feet, I realized I'd
left my hat back at our rest stop.  So I wheeled around and went back for it.
A sun hat was a necessary essential on this trip!  Michael went on ahead and he
headed for the small notch on the left side of the glacier which was indeed
Cache Col.  As with most glaciers, it felt like a long time before we were at
the final steep snow finger that led to a short section of scree at Cache Col.
A little bit of ice axe work put us on top and we had our first views of Mount
Formidible and the Middle Fork of the Cascade River.  We took another break at
this grand vista.

{% image /cmaimages/2003/theron-formidable.jpg %}
Mount Formidible from Cache Col

Our original plans called for a climb of Hurry-up Peak but we were both
actually losing interest in this.  Maybe it was a result of gaining all of this
elevation with our packs on.  We set our sights on getting to Kool Aid Lake,
which was just out of view to the left.  There was still a decent path heading
down to the lake.  It turned out that this entire trip featured good treads to
follow.  The only lengthy spot that I can think of that did not have a path was
the area around LeConte Peak.  We soon were able to see Kool Aid Lake about 800
feet below us.  The path led us through dusty scree and some pleasant heather
slopes.  Down at the lake we met Peggy Goldman, author of 75 Scrambles in
Washington, and her husband who had sustained a calf injury.  He wasn't in any
pain, just wasn't able to walk!  They were awaiting a rescue helicopter.  The
helicopter arrived about 10 minutes after we arrived.  In the meantime, they
gave us beta on Mount Formidable which they had recently climbed.  With that
climb, Peggy had finished climbing the hundred highest peaks in Washington.

{% image /cmaimages/2003/theron-rescue.jpg %}
*Alpine rescue at Kool Aid Lake*

It was still pretty early in the day but we didn't want to expend too much
energy climbing Hurry-up Peak.  It probably would have been pretty easy from
this high spot but we decided to press on to some reputed camp sites beyond the
Red Ledge in order to get closer to, and save our energy for Mount Formidable
which we would try the next day.  The snow approach to the Red Ledge was a
little steep but not bad.  The ledge itself was completely melted out and an
easy passage up to higher slopes where we found a sweet campsite above the path
near another ice melt stream.  We both dipped our cups and drank our fills.

{% image /cmaimages/2003/theron-jberg.jpg %}
*The view behind us.  On the left is Johannesburg.  On the far right is Mix-up.  Eldorado Peak is framed in the middle.*

{% image /cmaimages/2003/theron-camp.jpg %}
*Campsite beyond the Red Ledge with a great view of the Middle Cascade Glacier and Mount Formidible*

The rest of the late afternoon was spent resting and then preparing our food on
a small bluff just below our campsite.  This was a great spot to be - looking
way down on the lower parts of the glacier and the valley even further below.
We turned in as the light waned.

## Day Two

On awaking, we packed up, had a little breakfast, and headed deeper into the
Cascades - always a great feeling!  We strolled an easy path to talus that led
to the Middle Cascade Glacier and the indeed formidable north face of Mount
Formidable.  After a look at the broken glacier hanging on the face, our ideas
to climb the easier south side were cemented.  The traverse and climb up the
glacier were straightforward and pleasant - we didn't have to deal with too
many crevasses and certainly the heavily broken part of the glacier is easily
avoided.  We were heading for the Spider-Formidable col which would lead us
down and around to the back side of Formidable and eventually to Yang Yang
Lakes which would be camp 2.

There are two cols at the top of the glacier and we couldn't recall which was
the correct one.  The right looked more prominent but there were scary cliffs
under it on the other side.  The left one, the much more narrow one, is the
correct one.  From here, the LeConte Glacier is perfectly framed in an awesome
display of rugged nature.  And we'd be heading in to that terrain on the third
day.

Coming out of the col, we had to descend 45 degree snow.  The snow, as I
recall, was quite solid (a pleasant surprise) and the descent was easy.  We
then traversed right along snow and talus to the base of a prominent saddle.
Along the trail, below the saddle, is a campsite.  I pulled all of the stuff
out of my pack and threw everything but the essentials of a climb of Formidable
in my pack.  Michael gave me his stuff as well.  I carried the *stuff* and
Michael carried the rope.  We set out for our climb of Formidable.  Most of the
approach to Formidable is over a lot of talus and scree.  We had to traverse
under the peak for a long way before we started heading up, further than feels
natural, but the summit is indeed actually pretty far to the west.

It's hard to tell where the summit is even from the saddle.  We mistook the
summit to the east of the true summit as the peak that we were heading for.
Formidable is a pretty complex mountain.  Anyway, we traversed a couple of
snowfields and headed for a ridge further to the west.  We heard voices and
spotted another party apparently heading down.  As we got closer, we realized
they were trying a different route, moving from the west back to the east.  We
were within echo shot of them and communication was hard, but they were indeed
trying a different route.  Once we got up on the ridge on 3rd class scrambling,
we realized we were in the right place and we hollered at them to follow.  The
ridge featured some prominently smooth, flat slabs and this would be our
landmark on the way down.  Easy 2nd class terrain got us to the base of the
high snowfield and we put on crampons and headed up.  At the top, we left
crampons and began the long, loose scramble to the top.

We scrambled up 3rd class terrain and slabs to a prominent gully.  We
recognized this as the one that Peggy Goldman and her husband had mentioned to
us - it had a cairn on both sides of it.  So, we crossed the 4th class but
pleasantly solid terrain to the other side.  From here, it got loose again.  I
headed up a wide gully on a right hand, slightly more solid, rib and Michael
stuck to the talus and scree.  We noticed two points that looked like summits.
The left looked higher, but the right point was the one we saw from the saddle,
which looked higher from that point.  I spotted a cairn leading to the right,
so we went that way.  Fun scrambling got us to the top, but not the summit!  (I
hope that someone has destroyed that cairn...we didn't have the option to.)

The true summit was indeed the west one.  I followed the ridge, a solid
sidewalk in the sky, to the true summit, hoping for a direct route.  There
wasn't one and we had to rappel back down.  From here, we scrambled the
remaining bit to the top.  On top, we saw the other party (BTW, this was Steve
and Julianne, whom we met later on the trip) appear on the false summit as
well.  The views were just as good from over there and they were content to
stay at that point.

We had a long way back, across a lot of loose slopes, talus, and scree.  We
made a single rappel on some of the steeper terrain.  Climbing back up to the
saddle was a big hassle (very loose), so we jumped over to some grassier and
more stable ground.  Back at the packs, we reloaded and headed down to Yang
Yang Lakes.  The hike into the lakes is beautiful, the backdrop being the
LeConte Glacier and surrounding peaks.

We arrived at camp with plenty of daylight to relax and unwind.  We spent some
time following the trail beyond the lakes to see exactly how we were going to
get through the cliffs below LeConte Peak.  The trail dog-legged backwards in a
talus field and we saw how that would work.  I wanted to swim, however, it was
a bit too late and, being a lake situated on the east, was already out of
direct sunlight.  Michael kindly shared a smashed turkey sandwiched that he'd
forgotten about and we had our real dinner about an hour later.  Michael turned
in early and I strolled around a bit and found a nice vantage spot where I
could casually view the LeConte Glacier.

## Day Three

We arose to a crystal clear morning, excited to push even deeper into this
remote wilderness.  Our goal at the end of the day was to be at White Rocks
Lake, which is the most remote spot on the Ptarmigan Traverse and, not
surprisingly, the most stunningly scenic.  We followed the trail that we'd
scouted the day before, made our way through talus, and wound our way through
cliffs along easy grass slopes until we were way up on the broad alpine ridge
under LeConte peak.  We had ideas to climb LeConte Peak but it didn't look too
exciting from here and decided to save our energy for a more remote peak,
namely Old Guard.

The trail faded away up here and we spread out a bit searching for the best
passage.  We probably went higher than we needed to but after passing through
much talus, cliffs, and snow, we got to a point where we could see a clear path
to the LeConte glacier.  It was mostly through snow so we donned our crampons
and headed out.

It's kind of tricky to see how you get from the LeConte Glacier to the other
side where the South Cascade Glacier was.  We had to travel quite a long way on
the LeConte Glacier to a high col that's right next to Sentinel Peak.  We came
to a point on the glacier where we weren't exactly sure where to go.  To the
left was a jumble of crevasses and seracs that might have a passage, straight a
head was another jumble that looked impassable, and to the right was an
unsavory muddy and steep gully along the moat to squeeze through.  We tried the
left route and soon realized that all potential routes ended in crevasses to
wide to pass.  We then tried the straight route and found that what looked
impassable was done with a short steep snow step.  If that route wasn't
available, I guess you'd have to climb through the moat somehow or descend and
try to pick your way through upward the crevasse maze.  Fortunately, it was
just a few steep steps aided by the picks of our ice axes to arrive on top.

From here, it was casual glacier travel to the col that led to the South
Cascade Glacier.  Just before arriving at the col, we dropped our packs and
headed out for Old Guard Peak which looked really close to us, at the top of
the ice cap.  We skipped over several thin crevasses on the way up.  There's a
snow finger that leads pretty far up on the south west side of Old Guard Peak.
It's pretty steep and there's a bergshrund underneath it.  So, I found this a
little intimidating with this loose Cascade snow.  Exiting on to rock was
tricky too because the rock was very sloping.  We ended up using an ice screw
to hold our packs, ice axes, and crampons.  Armed with our cameras, we
scrambled up solid and exposed 4th class terrain to easy 3rd class terrain.  On
the top, we had the best views of the trip!  Old Guard is situated in a great
spot with great angles to view the Chickamin Glacier.

The view back on to the LeConte glacier revealed a fish-gill design of
crevasses.   We descended and were soon back at our packs.  There were also
some other Ptarmigan Traversers at the col, two parties of two.  The view down
to the big South Cascade Glacier revealed terrain that looked a good bit easier
than we had been on.  We all headed out for the top of the glacier where we
would then descend to White Rocks lake, our third camp.  Michael and I had
ideas to climb Sentinel Peak though.

We were on a snowfield well above the glacier and the terrain was easy enough
that we didn't need crampons.  We crossed plenty of talus and slabs as well.
Michael and I dropped our packs again and headed up the grassy slopes of
Sentinel Peak.  Michael spotted a bear pawing his way up the glacier.  We
climbed maybe a third of the way up the peak and realized that we were pretty
tired.  We rationalized that we should continue to save our strength and that
the views wouldn't be too different than Old Guard (not any better, that's for
sure), and it was getting pretty loose.  So we stopped, rested, then turned
around.

The route down to White Rocks was a steep one, but not too long, thankfully.
The turquoise lakes are picturesque.  Across the valley (the west fork of the
Agnes) we had a 5000 foot view, from the base of the valley, to the glacier
slabs-lined with steep waterfalls, to the broken glaciers, to the high rocky
peaks.  There were three other Ptarmigan parties at the lakes here.  Michael
picked a spot next to the lake but I wanted to have the big view so I picked a
small bivy site overlooking the valley and up to the peaks.  We all got
together as the sun was going down to share Michael's bottle ("gimme that
bottle!") of White Tequila - a great bedtime drink that warms the stomach! -
and chat.  The climb up the Dana Glacier and to Spire Col looked quite
intimidating from here.  That was the plan for tomorrow.

## Day Four

We awoke to yet another clear day.  Everyone else was up as well.  Michael and
I were usually the ones to set out first (we got up earlier and didn't bother
with stoves) so I got my things ready to go and packed up.  Michael hadn't come
over to my camp yet so I took the time to take some sunrise pictures.  I had
plenty of time since Michael had overslept some!  No problem there, as a
physician adviser to the Lewis and Clark expedition said, "Men need their rest.
And the rest means prone!".  We actually repeated that quote a lot.  Our only
real rest was at night; each day was packed with peak climbing and traveling
which took its toll.  A few minutes later, Michael showed up and we were off.

The day before we tried to spy a trail leading up to Spire Col but didn't have
much luck.  We concocted a plan, however, on how to deal with the glacier.  Our
plan was to hit a left trending snow field with distinct gray-splotch markings
on it and then to cross over the majority of the crevasses to the far left
side, and then gain a prominent wide fin of snow that would probably lead us to
the col.  There is a decent trail through the vegetation, past several falls,
and then peters out in the talus under the glacier slabs.  Using our previous
plans, we were able to pick a way up through the talus and slabs and ended up
in the exact spot that we wanted - the gray-splotched snowfield.

We put on our crampons and headed up.  The going was quite easy, what looked
nearly vertical yesterday was actually about 30 degrees.  The snow became quite
icy as we exited on to rock.  We decided to follow the rock up, still wearing
crampons, to its end.  The alternative was to downclimb about 200 feet back to
the glacier.  Heck with that.  Climbing up saved us a good bit of elevation
though it also led to more crevassed terrain.  The going was totally manageable
though and we were able to cross over and then easily make our way to the snow
rib.

Sure enough, we were able to follow the snow rib up to Spire Col.  We took a
break here while checking out our options for a climb of Spire Point.  From a
distance, Spire Point is impressive!  The Beckey guide mentions that the route
is 4th class.  Cascade climbers know what to make of that!  We packed up again,
got the rack and rope ready to go and headed up the glacier to the base of
Spire Point.

We exited the glacier and scrambled over to the north face.  I decided to take
the lead on this climb and headed up.  The first pitch was quality 5.4 and I
stopped at a small but comfortable belay spot at a rap station.  The second
pitch led us over to the left.  I headed out again up similar slopes and came
to the crux move - an exposed, hard to protect, sloping slab that was about 30
feet long.  The slab wasn't very steep but it sloped over the cliffs on the
left which made it awkward.  I had a pretty bomber sling at the base of it and
tenuously headed out.  We were in boots, this would be distinctively easier in
rock shoes, and had to really pay attention to foothold.  The holds appeared as
needed though and I was soon at the top, the belay for the final pitch.  I
think I rated it 5.7 (boots).

The final pitch looked easier.  Indeed it was, but I thought it would end up
being 4th class, it was more like 5.2.  What looked like to be a super exposed
final summit move was actually pretty comfortable with a nice ledge on the
right.  Soon enough I was on top.  I saw other White Rocks Lake camp companions
heading up the glacier below and let out a holler.  They were able to see me
and hollered back!  Michael then quickly came up and we enjoyed the summit.

We downclimbed the last pitch then rappelled the remainder of the route.  Our
next objective was to get back to our packs and then down to Itswoot Ridge, the
traditional last camp for the Ptarmigan Traverse.

Probably my least favorite part of the trip was the descent to Itswoot Ridge.
It was long, loose, and dusty.  At one point, I decided to take grassy slopes
down.  Michael got disgusted with the potential slipping and opted to slide the
rest of the way down on scree.  We caught up with the remainder of the parties
who were already down at the ridge.  We set up the Betamid tent and then
scrambled inside to escape the sun.  We ended up laying around for at least two
hours and let the most intense sun diminish.  We then went about the usual
tasks of cleaning up and getting ready for dinner.  After dinner, I opted for a
bivy site on a rocky outcropping on the ridge that had perfect spots for
sleeping.  Yeah, it was rock but it was flat as a pancake and there was even a
small depression for your feet!  One of the parties headed down to Cub Lake to
camp but the other two were planning to climb Dome Peak.  We spent the last few
moments of daylight checking out the route and making plans for the following
morning.

## Day Five

After another great night of sleep, we were ready to head out for Dome.  Again,
Michael and I set out first and made quick time across the glacial slabs
towards Dome.  There is a trail for a bit but of course it fades out fairly
soon in the rock.  We'd picked our route the day before and it called for
heading straight across to a small buttress, then heading up and hitting the
glacier where we could put on our crampons and rope up.  The morning was unlike
any of the others during our trip - quite cloudy.  The clouds were hanging low,
but still above the peaks.  Clouds occasionally covered the summit of Dome Peak
and Glacier Peak to the south was almost always obscured.

Traversing the Dome glacier was straightforward.  We were aiming for a
prominent notch to the north of the summit of Dome.  The only crevasse crossing
was traversing up to the notch and it was easy, especially after dealing with
much bigger glaciers like the LeConte and the Dana glaciers.

At the base of the notch we climbed up with crampons still on thinking that we
might have to climb up more snow that was visible above the notch.  This snow
was actually the top of the Chickamin glacier and we didn't have to cross it.
Instead we headed up the top of the notch and began scrambling up Dome Peak.
The walls steepened dramatically in front of us and we moved left, almost in
line with the tip of the Chickamin glacier.  The rock on dome is an inviting
off-white color but is mighty loose! 

So we climbed carefully up and eventually arrived at what looked like the
summit.  At first, we thought this was a let down, but we needed to just turn
hard right to see the true summit further up.  More scrambling got us to the
final pitch to the summit - a nice thrilling short step and then an exposed
catwalk to the true summit.

We lounged around on the summit for a really long time, watching the clouds
slowly lower on us.  Below, we saw the other two parties approach the notch,
climb up, and eventually arrive on top.  So we had a 100% success rate on Dome
Peak this day.  Michael and I had ideas of traversing over to the southwest
summit which is a really sharp point attained by an exposed ridge traverse.
Due to the weather, we decided to descend instead and see if the weather
improved along the way and, if so, try a climb of Dynaflow Tower.

At the last moment we decided to try it.  We stashed our stuff at the lip of
the glacier.  Michael decided to lead this one and the opening pitch looked
awesome - super solid granite.  It was indeed a lot of fun, moderately easy,
low fifth class climbing.  The belay for pitch two was a really small ledge on
the north ridge.  Michael led out on the left side of the ridge and was gone.
The clouds again had begun to sag down on us and the upper part of the climb
became obscured.  There were moments where Michael appeared to not be moving
for long periods of time.  I was getting pretty cold up here and got impatient
to start moving.  Michael had good reasons to move slowly though.

The second pitch transformed to quality and safe granite to this scary loose
stuff.  It looked solid enough but it wasn't.  On top of that, there were these
lodged shards of sharp rock here and there just waiting to explode and come
raining down.  Michael had to be very careful in avoiding these mines.  It was
easier for me because he was able to point out these trouble spots from above.
The last belay was about 30 feet below the summit.

The final pitch was even worse - super loose crap!  So, in the end, Dynaflow
Tower is not a recommended climb.  We made delicate rappels and an odd
self-belay scheme concocted by Michael got us back down to the glacier.

Back at Itswoot Ridge, everyone had packed up and headed down to Cub Lake.
Actually, one of the parties actually made a push to get down to Downey Creek
(that must have made for a long day!).  The weather was still cloudy but
pleasant.  We decided to take a rest before packing up.  Michael eventually
grabbed his sleeping back to lay on.  Thinking that looked pretty comfortable,
I did the same.  Soon enough, conversation started to dwindle and we fell
asleep.  A couple hours later we awoke and fearing that we'd get rained on with
our stuff scattered here and there, we packed up really quick and headed down
to Cub Lake.

It felt good to have all the glacier and rock climbing of the trip done.  But
we still had a big objective in mind that lay right before us:  The climb up to
the ridge at the head of Bachelor, then back down into the valley which was
reputed to be full of downed trees from an avalanche.  Then, it was the brushy
trail down Bachelor Creek.  After that, it was another six or seven miles out
Downey Creek.

## Day Six

The morning was another cloudy one but dry.  We headed up the steep slopes to
the ridge at the head of Bachelor Creek.  We were anxious to see the avalanche
devastation.  After wending around a bit at the top of the basin, we came to
our first scramble and slide through fallen trees.  It wasn't until we got into
the forests though that the really thick avalanche debris appeared.  We
actually dealt with it pretty well, following a faint path here and there
through sections of the mess.  We did plenty of crawling under and over fallen
trees and eventually ended up getting in the old growth forest on the right
until we got beyond the debris.  Then, we hiked down to the creek and spied the
trail on the other side of the creek.  Feeling proud and relieved, we continued
our march out.  We passed a party camping nearby who, I thought, said we were
mostly done with the difficulties.  This certainly wasn't true.  Though there
is a trail the whole way, there's plenty of invasive brush and log crawling and
hopping.  The descent out Bachelor Creek felt really long; I'd imagine the
ascent would be quite taxing.  Finally, we started switchbacking steeply down,
a sure sign that we were entering the glacier valley of Downey Creek. 

We rested at Downey Creek and finished up all of our food and prepared for the
final trek out.  Michael prepared an ugly brew of iodine water and gatorade
that had the appearance of mud.  He grimaced sourly when tasting it.  I didn't
fill up my water here.  I had a reasonable amount left and didn't trust the
water here.  The Ptarmigan is so high and goes through so many glaciers that we
filled our water directly from glacier streams which are pretty safe.

The hike out Downey was uneventful.  We were back in deep dark forests winding
in and out of smaller stream gullies feeding the larger creek.  When we saw the
signs announcing the wilderness boundary, we got really excited that we were
finishing the climb.  Then there was the road and the car.  Man, it hit us
suddenly - six days, six glaciers, five major passes, and five peaks later, we
were done!

One extra interesting tidbit of information is the effect that the Ptarmigan
had on my hiking clothes! I’ve worn the same clothes for like the past 4 years,
an REI pair of adjustable pants, a white North Face polypro long sleeve shirt,
standard wool socks. Well, each one of these garments (including my backup pair
of socks) pretty much disintegrated after getting back home. My pants randomly
started forming holes (not rips)! Dirt was ground in sufficiently into my shirt
such that nothing, save perhaps gasoline, would get it out. Of course, my socks
had holes worn in them. So, I gave my great reliable apparel an honorable
burial when I got home.

