---
title: Pale di San Martino, Gran Pilaster
date: 2008-7-10
blurb: Part of our long Italy trip
template: page.jade
---

* The Dolomites with Carlos and Theron
* July, 2008

### The Gran Pilaster

After a difficult late night trying to get down to this southerly
Dolomite region (I'd never been this far south), we crashed on the
ground for a few hours of sleep. Our guidebook warned us against
trying this climb from the ski lift, probably because it doesn't open
until 8 am, but there was no way we were going to walk up after our
previous hard hiking days. So we slept until almost 7 am, then started
getting ready.

I had mentioned a lot of different climbs to Carlos and Theron over
the months before their visit, but this one, the Gran Pilaster on the
iconic Pala di San Martino really seemed to stick. In my mind, it
didn't stand out especially, but at any opportunity one or the other
of my friends would mention it: clearly it was a goal not to be passed
up! So I got into the spirit too, and the heroics of the night before
were our way of living up to that dream. 

What had happened was we came running down from the mountains on the
south side of the Ortler Range, did everything right and ended up at
my car by 6 pm, ready for the drive east back into the Dolomites and
hopefully bed by 10 pm. But we didn't count on the random closure of
the Stelvio Pass just on the north side! But no way that would stop
us...we turned around, drove back to Bormio, got some gas, and mapped
out a southerly escape from these high mountains. Of course we managed
it, but I'll never forget the chilling views down from the southerly
pass! And the granite mountains bathed in alpineglow and strafed by
cloud further south were absolutely breathtaking: the Ademello!

We had a really hard time finding a pizzeria, but finally we were
making our way down to the Autostrada in the deep valley of Bolzano
and Trento. Not before another heart-stopping mountain view of the
Presanella. I had no idea how beautiful those mountains were, and you
can bet I'll be back!

Carlos finished the long drive over more passes, dodging rabbits and
deer on the final approach. We had done it - we were in position with
a good weather window on what would probably be one of our favorite
climbs ever! Now to execute...

After the lifts, we walked briskly to a Refugio, then got right on the
trail that would take us down then left into a side valley. I was
nervous, as usual, hurrying ahead, scouting for crowds or approach
hints. Carlos and Theron came along after, unwilling to break their
knees to start 15 minutes earlier! A few other parties turned out to
be heading for a via ferrata that traversed off to the south. Happily,
we only had to walk a few minutes up a trail in scree to reach the
snowbanks that girdled the lower face. Eager to begin, we scrambled
over the snow, up and right on the rock, hoping to gain a hoped-for
piton belay 50 meters above. But after 30 meters of scrambling the
climbing got a little too serious to go on without a rope. Belaying in
a little nook, Carlos sent me up while Theron scanned the face with
the video camera. I was glad we belayed, because it wasn't easy.

Before the climb we'd worked out how we'd climb very
quickly. Basically everyone would stay busy. Eating was done only
while belaying. Unless we got more time, or one of the guys got a
"wild hair," I would do all the leading. When they came up to me,
either Carlos or Theron would have me on belay with my rack in less
than a minute. Although it made the climb a little bit lonely for me,
it really was quick. As it was, it took all the daylight we had to get
off technical ground, so we were really glad we thought about how to
keep the momentum going.

We only simul-climbed when I ran out of rope before finding a suitable
belay. This was because we weren't all at the same skill level. Carlos
was very new to alpine climbing, and Theron had been working in China
all year, with nary a cam placement or finger crack to grapple with.

We climbed on one 50 meter rope, with Carlos and Theron about 15 feet
apart. We also had an emergency static 50 meter rap line stowed in
Carlos' pack. I definitely feel that a long rope is not worthwhile on
long Dolomite moderate or "classic" climbs. With short pitches and
many traversing features, it's as likely to lead to shouting matches,
puzzlement and wasted time as anything else. Since belays are usually
just one or two cemented pitons, or a slung horn, you aren't losing
much time by stopping early. It's also good to have a second (or
third) pair of eyes to confirm route finding decisions, which can be
tricky, especially on your first climbs in the area.

Theron was, rightfully enough I imagine, frankly appalled at the
amount of runout the leader has to put up with. The problem appeared
worse on the knife-edge of the Fuenffingerspitzen, but was still
obvious here: you might go 20 meters before finding a good horn, nut
placement or piton for protection. However, when you found "natural"
protection, it was likely to be of the very best type: a "Sanduhr."
That's a natural column of rock, firmly held at the top and bottom by
the rest of the rock face. Many of these would hold a trunk. Plus, who
is thinking about protection when surrounded by such "ideal" holds
as the Pale Dolomites offers? Just reach around a corner to find a
wonderful handlebar. And when the rock looks blank and slabby, then
the smallest crease is likely to be so in-cut as to transport even the
leader 30 meters above protection into a contented dream. The phrase
"there is always a way," seems to have been invented for these
mountains!

Enough meta-discussion! For our first 8 or so pitches we remained in
or alongside a great chimney system. Only once was the climbing
especially engaging in here: a vertical corner where the walls pinched
down. Delicate stemming and balance, with a nice piton right where you
think to yourself, "whoa this just stepped up a notch!" I guess
someone else thought so too...but how old are those pitons? Never mind!

We were cold in the chimney, and for more than an hour longed for the
sun we saw above. Finally I stepped into surprisingly hot glare and
relished the sun on my back as I belayed. A short food break and we
started on the middle third of the climb: a somewhat nebulous trip up
and left away from the chimney and onto a vague pillar yet to be
found. I remember we felt like we could "relax" when we finished
this section. 

The scenery in here really began to open up, also to close. Looking
down we could finally see how far above the scree fans we'd
climbed. Across to brown, black and yellow faces. And in closing, up
into cloud girdling the upper towers. Hmm. Let's keep moving and see
what happens.

I'm actually surprised that we got these pitches right, the directions
are pretty vague and there are several possibilities to veer to the
side. But we emerged on a postcard small ledge with a 20 meter
leftward traverse: surely there is only one of those on a given face?
And we were back in the sun.

I decided to combine two pitches, betraying a little nervousness about
the weather. Sure enough, one pitch up from the sunny ledge it started
to hail. "Oh...wow," I thought, quickly imagining all the worst case
scenarios. But for now, I just got my shell jacket out, put my gloves
in the pockets and imagined my friends were doing the same. Unless it
got noticeably worse, we'd keep going.

But at that moment I nearly made a wrong turn. Not quite done with the
vague section of the climb, I knew I needed to get on the crest of a
shallow buttress. But which one? Several humps might qualify in the
roiling clouds above me. My first thought was the one where Theron
hunkered under an overhang, urging me leftward to easier ground. But
he was right, it was dead vertical above him. Still...

Tugged in two directions, I paused. The hail stopped and the cloud
seemed to dissipate with great speed. Without being able to enumerate
why now, I *knew* right was right and left was wrong. I climbed a
corner, rewarded with a piton as possible route confirmation. Above, I
found no belay, so led us another 15-20 meters on a hunt. My perch,
with a solid *Sanduhr* belay was one of the best eagle's eyrie's
I've had the pleasure to visit. I sat and looked down into murky gray.
Then, as if unable to bear my frustrated gaze any longer, the cloud
melted to reveal a cavern of space so deep I could only curse
hoarsely. I saw crazed switchbacks of a trail descending to the
valley, and around me all rock plummeting downward in a vertical
scream. A crow came out of a cloud below then disappeared into another
one. Carlos and Theron came up, then enjoyed this perch for a
time. That was one to lock in the memory chest, I thought.

The climbing was at it's best in here: made exciting by the air
beneath, and by the natural steepness of the blunted buttress. "This
is fuckin' awesome," I kept saying under my breath. The sun and a
horde of clouds played across the face. In fact, for the last third of
the climb, and much of the descent, the clouds would take center stage
because of the mystique they brought with them. We never got hailed on
again, and always had good sight when we needed it, so they weren't
unwelcome intruders. But in this range they *did* seem to have a
life of their own. A Fourth Climber from then on. Though we might
should have, we didn't fear them.

We came to a dihedral marking the boundary between steep yellow rock
and a more moderate buttress that we would follow to the top. A
Nutella sandwich in the hot sun, watching the clouds boil around a
lesser peak, then it was time to finish. Very good nut protection on
that pitch, then a hand traverse out left to avoid a bulge. Above, a
long simul-climb pitch as the terrain eased. Two more rope-lengths got
us to a false summit where we put the rope away and scrambled to the
top: a broad flat place with a red bivouac box at the far end.

Feeling really proud that we'd pulled it off together, we shook hands
and took some video footage. We were in the sun, with groups of
pillowy clouds below, and I think it was around 6 pm.

We looked in the bivouac box and realized we could sleep there
comfortably if we wanted to. I was against it, because the weather was
supposed to turn bad the next day. Theron really, really wanted to
stay and Carlos and I broke his heart by insisting on going down for
safety. It sure would have been great though. He was thinking of
sunset and sunrise video and still photography. "The chance to sleep
on a Dolomite summit!" As it turned out, he was completely right: the
morning was blue sky and cloudless. He gets to tell us "I told you
so" for some years, I guess!

But, decision made, we had to hurry down. The guidebook warned that it
would take a while. They were right! First, scrambling without much
difficulty to round a tower, all marked with red paint. We came down
into the clouds, so never saw an overview of what we were doing, but
essentially the key is to traverse 5 towers as you descend, eventually
reaching the vast plateau that stretches out behind the peak.

We made countless rappels and traverses. Eventually Carlos insisted on
a belay. He was getting tired, and the exposure had a cumulative
effect: he didn't trust the rock or his climbing any more. Wisdom 
consists in knowing yourself, and I'm glad he spoke up. However I was
grumpy at the time, leading us on tedious rope-dragging "pitches"
around corners to find yet another rappel station. The usual flaking
and coiling...repeat ad infinitum as darkness descends...

But finally we were done. It was almost full dark, and Theron took the
lead to hike up a knoll where we could see the lights of the hut far
below on the plateau. We didn't even bother taking off our rope or
harnesses, we just hoped to move quickly enough to make it down before
full dark, or before they turned off the lights and we'd be adrift on
the big plateau.

I was completely confused as to where we were, but somehow Theron knew
the right way to go. "Go left!" he would call to me in front on the
rope, and I would, marveling at how I thought the right answer was to
go right! But this was working great, and fortune smiled on us again
with a half-moon bright enough to cast shadows.

We reached the hut at 10 pm, just as the warden turned off the lights
for bed. In retrospect, it was pretty funny sitting there eating
delicious hot soup while the warden and his family sat around us
sighing loudly. Every time I was say "this is great soup!" or
"thank you again!" in whatever language, the girl would snort and
snicker loudly. I was too pleased with the epic day to take
offense. What a great thing life is!

We couldn't help but gloat at our luck. Back in the Cascades, our
reward would have been a tiring bash out to the car at 2 am. But here
we were, just out of our helmets, and already in bed with warm
bellies. Sleep came quickly, to visions of the clouds playing among
the rocks. 

![Dan low on Hexenstein.](images/P1040443.jpg)
![Threading the needle: we came from under the perched boulder on Hexenstein.](images/P1040448.jpg)
