---
title: Silver Star Mountain
date: 2000-5-15
layout: post
---

* Silver Star Glacier
* May 15, 2000

Our plans were falling apart!  At a rousing reunion dinner with Jeff
Thursday night, I waxed on about the need to get out into the snow and
climb!  But then Peter couldn't make it, and Jake and I didn't have
cars for Saturday.  Steve was out for several weeks with an injury.
Also, Jake had to be back Sunday morning.


Our options narrowing, and the weather very bad, we tried to pull it
together until 9:30 pm. Jake spent the afternoon dealing with the
stock market ("Bloody Friday"), an insanely incompetent bank, and a
flat tire. I dealt with a product release that kept me at work long
after I hoped to be driving to Washington Pass, a smile on my face!


We called it off, after valiant efforts. But my soon-to-be-idle body
still sought with devilish fury to get out of town. With my best
puppy-dog eyes, I pleaded for the car, and Kris relented, gamely
signing up for the bus. She would have a long adventure of her own
there, but in the meantime, we could go!


Calling my boon companion Jake, I agreed to pick him up at 2:15 am, a
mere 3 hours hence. This was going to be a day trip to Silver Star
Mountain, in uncertain weather.  Who were we kidding?


I kidded myself into sleep for about an hour, drove to the city, and
soon we were ensconsed in the dark car-cocoon. Pop-tarts, water, and
murmuring about the route kept us busy for the long drive. We came
into rain, then snow, emerging at the pass in a blue filtered
gauze. We opted for the longer Silver Star Creek route, fearing
avalanche conditions on the Burgundy Col. With a TOPO! map, and a
rudimentary idea of where to go, we found the creek and began
snowshoeing. It was 6:30 am.


I remember distinctly feeling I had more determination than energy,
and throughout the day looked to that in order to keep going. I
envisioned us stumbling out after dark, tripping over limbs as a way
to prepare for a very long day.


But the climb would direct my thoughts outward. The first 1000 feet in
forest are quite steep, no matter how you wend your way over and
around. We kept the creek in earshot, and every time I saw running
water I regretted my two full quarts!  I'd become a ruthless
capitalist, examining the ledger sheet of weight carried to strength
expended.


But the weather was actually nice. We enjoyed views of our valley
opening up. Cloudy, with light snow, we had faith we'd get some sun
later. As we toiled up, Jake remarked how much better to have this
than blinding sun and mushy snow.


We stayed near the creek, often on thick snowbridges right in the
creekbed. Emerging into a flat area, we scouted our route off to the
right, and began climbing the moderately open slope. Gently traversing
deeper into the valley and closer to rocks on the east side, we came
to a broad cirque which offered several possibilities.  We could have
continued across it and up a moderately steep open break in a ridge,
or continued up one of two colouirs to the right. Here we roped up for
the glacier we would be on soon. I remembered how exotic roping up for
a glacier used to seem.


Jake led the way up our colouir, which leaned at a moderate angle. The
walls closed in, and suspense built as we wondered what would come
next. At the top, I led across a bowl hard under rock towers. We
decided we must be under Burgundy Spire, and had climbed right up to
Burgundy Col, although we were never sure of this until the way back.


Excitement building, we crossed another bowl, rounded a corner, and
there found the vast glacier before us. The summit rocks were in mist,
so it took a few minutes of talking about the map to choose our
direction. It looked higher to the right, but the broad flat area 800
feet above looked to be just right of the summit. We'd climb over
there.


The clouds started breaking up, giving tantalizing glimpses into
another world. From white wisps would emerge jumbled towers and blue
sky, only to disappear again. We really wished for our snowshoes,
cached at our rope-up spot. The deep snow must have slowed us down
considerably.


Finally, in a blast of wind we stood on the plateau at glacier
head. Unroping, we climbed the steeper snow and rocks towards the
summit. After 300 feet, we were at the final impasse, a mixture of
good rock and rotten snow. Jake deftly showed the way, and I followed
to a point. The last 7 feet were too much for me, but Jake squeezed
into a short offwidth chimney and stood on a ledge on the opposite
side of the summit block. Gloves encrusted with ice, we were soon
ready to descend the mixture of rotten snow and icy rock. As a bonus,
there was good snow for plunge stepping just off of the route we
climbed, and this sped our descent. Totally fulfilled, we proclaimed
our happiness to have had "weather" as opposed to just sun. As long as
the "weather" gives you those windows in the clouds from time to time,
I'd always chose it, since the mixture of cloud and rock is very
exciting...


Quickly down the glacier, around the corner and up slightly, we
admired Burgundy Spire, now totally visible. Stepping down our colouir
(we tried to glissade but the snow was too deep), we soon were
unroping at our packs. A final bite to eat, and we started the walk
back. We pushed pretty hard, and it seems we never stopped all the way
down to the flat area, into the creekbed, out and into the steep
forest above the car. Wow, it was only 4 pm! So much for my "stumbling
out at midnight theory".  So Silver Star really is a great day
trip. We also had the place to ourselves the whole time. Back at the
car, there were several parties getting ready to hike up a ways and
camp.


It felt so good to get out into the mountains, Jake and I were all
smiles on the way back. We identified some peaks from the car, Jake
found some great ones in the Pickets.  I showed him Hozomeen, which
looks amazing. But arrgh, the gods that be couldn't let the trip be
just perfect! I got a speeding ticket in Concrete, just before leaving
town.  I didn't wait for the sign to say "55," so they got me going
45+ in a 35. I must apologize to Jake for being a big wet blanket the
rest of the way home, so unhappy with myself!


Oh well, I'm over it now, and ready for another trip!


