---
title: Elk Mountain
date: 1997-03-22
layout: post
---

This day hike provided an opportunity to use my new shoe-shoes for the
first time. The MSR Denali Llama is one of the cheapest shoes you can
buy at 99 dollars, but also the most versatile. Deep crampons on
sides, front and back bite into the snow on steep slopes, and
attachable platforms get you into deeper, powdery snow.

From what I have learned, the main rule in winter hiking is to be
prepared for anything. So even a day hike requires about 25 pounds of
extras. After the boots, snowshoes, parka shell, snow pants, gaiters,
gloves and hat comes extra sweater, food, water, first-aid kit,
sunscreen, maps, and compass. After adding a whistle, flashlight, pair
of shorts and binoculars, my large pack was well filled.

Kris and I had purchased a shiny new Toyota RAV4 exactly one week
before. Driving to the mountain in it (moonroof open!), I felt proud
but apprehensive. I've had many experiences with car vandals, and Kris
would be heartbroken if I limped home with a broken window. We have a
good alarm system, but you never know. I decided to stop worrying
about it, since there was nothing I could do, short of staying home
all the time.

It was a beautiful clear day. I parked at the Clark Creek Snopark a
few miles up highway 35 from Government Camp. There was no sign of
anyone else, and the snowbound forest was as quiet as a
tomb. Strapping on my gear, I climbed the snowbank and entered a world
where everything was submerged under 8 feet of snow. The Forest
Service had marked the trails with painted boards on the trees. These
signs (when visible at all) were at the level of my ankles. Still, it
wasn't hard to tell where to go because of the ski tracks leading
away. Blue reflective markers pointed the way too.

After walking about ten minutes with the snowshoes, I had to stop for
the customary readjustment session. I took off my snowpants, replacing
them with shorts over my long underwear. I added gaiters to keep my
socks and feet dry. I took off my jacket and rolled my shirt-sleeves
up. This would be my outfit for the first hours of the trip, since you
work up a lot of sweat when snowshoeing!

I trudged east for 1 mile, then turned north and crossed a quaint log
bridge over rushing Clark Creek. I was amazed at the snowpack
dramatically visible at the river. A tiny rock island in the river was
submerged under a 12 foot cover of snow, as was anything else more
than a few feet in area. After the bridge I had to climb up a
snowbank, using the toes of my snowshoes for the first time. I seemed
to be the only living thing here, besides the rushing water.

After many twists and turns, I was surprised by a roomy little
snow-cave to the left of the trail. Someone had built it, with steps
leading down. I went inside and found a bench wide enough to sleep
on. It was colder inside than out, but it would certainly hold warmth
better. Cinders on the ground indicated a fire set in the previous
weeks.

Finally, I emerged into a small meadow on the south side of Newton
Creek. Here I saw two men with snowshoes. They were too far away to
talk to, so we waved to each other, and they headed west. Mount Hood
loomed behind them, dwarfing us all. This was the first view I had of
it since the road. Now it looked wilder and more dangerous. Elk
mountain shot straight up in front of me. I needed to get up there in
order to get to Elk Meadows with it's stone warming hut, and
not-yet-blooming fields below the mountain.

Here is where I took a wrong turn, or more precisely, failed to turn
at all. My guidebook indicating a switch-backing trail going up the
side of Elk Ridge. I assumed it was buried in the snow, and after a
few indecisive moments, chose to snowshoe straight up the side in an
area clear of trees. The way became so steep (nearly vertical) that I
was soon punching holes with my snowshoes and fists. Movement was
painfully slow, and beads of sweat fell from my hair though I was
hugging the cold snow wall. The only thing that made it worthwhile was
looking down and seeing the distance I had covered, and looking behind
me to see more canyons marching off to the south.

Each time I thought I had reached the top, another sheer slope
dominated my vision. I cursed myself for impulsively going up, and
worried that I would get to an inaccessible cliff and have to go back
down. Furthermore, I would slip a few yards every now and then and
this was infuriating in my rapidly tiring state. But the views of
Mount Hood and the surrounding valleys became more and more
inspiring. I think the east face of Mount Hood is the most
beautiful. The enormous pillar of volcanic rock assaults the senses
with it's absolute silence. I remember thinking that something so
massive couldn't possibly be so quiet and still.

About three-quarters of the way up the snow turned to ice around a
small waterfall. I used tree roots to clamber up and over, cursing the
ice for rebuffing my snowshoes.  Finally, when I could take no more, I
emerged on the summit. "Praise God," I repeated over 17 times. There
was a nice park-bench-like array of snow platforms to sit on with
alternating shade trees and clear, sunny patches. I took off the
snowshoes, lay my jacket on the ground and napped! It was about 1:15,
and I had been on the move since 9 am.


I tried to enjoy myself there, but was anxious to get to Gnarl Ridge
(already, I had my doubts that I could make it), or at least Elk
Meadows. I called Kris on the cell-phone and we had a scratchy, short
conversation. I shouted that I was fine, and I'd try to be home by 7
PM. Suddenly, I felt lonely after hanging up.

Gathering my gear, which I had sprawled all over the "park," I tromped
off to the northwest, hoping to converge on Elk Meadows. I entered a
forest of Whitebark pine with many standing snags. The snow here was
very deep, and I was beginning to post-hole.  The slope began tilting
up to my left, although it should have tilted down since Elk Meadow is
in a basin. This aroused my sixth sense. Examining the map, I decided
I must be on the east side of the ridge marching from north to south
on the east side of Elk Meadow, since it fell to the right and rose to
the left. I was therefore further east than I thought. I marveled at
the slope I had climbed, since the map indicated it was the steepest
on the mountain.

As I was readying to head more west than north, in order to get over
the ridge and down to the meadow, I stumbled on a solitary pair of ski
tracks going east and west. Gamely, I followed them to the west, with
the mountain again looming before me. Somehow, these tracks, probably
made days ago, provided me with much appreciated companionship in this
lonely forest.

I continued this way for an hour, and must have gone over a
mile. Newton Creek lay in the valley on my left, and the woods I
marched in stretched off north on the right. Since I didn't know my
exact position on a line, I couldn't venture north, even though I felt
Elk Meadows must lie that way. In this kind of silent, deadly
wilderness, you always want to know where you are, and if you don't
know exactly, you definitely play it safe!

Eventually I came to a saddle, where Elk Mountain slopes down behind
me, and Gnarl Ridge slopes up in front to the west. Ironically, now I
knew my location, but it was too late to tromp off north to the
meadow. I decided to go down to Newton Creek, but I didn't want to
retrace my steps.

I knew I would be sliding down, so I put the snow-pants on and zipped
everything up for a wild ride. Abruptly, I turned left, and began
skipping down the steep south slope to the creek two thousand feet
below. The going was fast and nerve-wracking, since the snowshoes
would occasionally post-hole and get stuck, while my body wanted to
careen ahead. Once, my left foot became stuck deep in a snowbank, and
I fell forward into a 4 foot deep tree well. Hanging upside down, with
a heavy pack and unable to pull my foot out of the snowbank I thought:
"What the heck am I doing here?!?" After much effort, I got my foot
out and fell in a heap against the tree. Other dangers including
bounding along on snow to later realize I was on a snow-bridge over a
healthy river flowing down the mountain. Visions of a cold, wet trip
back to the car steered me well clear of this undersnow menace!

After about 30 huffing minutes of this I felt I was almost down. Then
I saw ski tracks to my right and suddenly, skiers to my left coming
towards me. They looked up, startled at seeing a human, and I asked if
these were their tracks. They were friendly, and advised me to follow
them since I would have had to walk miles to the east in order to
cross Newton Creek. The tracks headed west and down, allowing me to
cross a wall of churned up snow, rising 10 feet above the rest of the
snowpack on the creek. The skiers pointed out that the wall extended
as far as could be seen to the west, where it must have fallen
violently from Gnarl Ridge. This was easily a mile away as the crow
flies! The power of this warehouse-sized column of snow must have been
humbling.

The pair, an informative couple - the man with a thoughtful beard and
the woman huffing in mirrored sunglasses, seemed worried about my
safety, asking if I had food and water. I assured them I was fine, and
they zoomed away, back towards the sno-park I had come from.  Its hard
not to envy them, since they can move so quickly. Perhaps later I'll
learn how to cross-country ski - snowshoeing is so much work!

The trudge back to my exit from the woods on the south side of Newton
Creek was very long. I didn't realize I had traveled so far towards
Gnarl Ridge up there. Also, I was glad I had taken their advice about
crossing the creek, since sheer cliffs rose up on the north, with no
way to cross in sight. I would have been in for an exhausting sidehill
traverse. Actually, I probably would have given up, and gone back to
Elk Mountain, and retraced my upward path down. I'm so glad that
didn't occur!

Finding my exit point, I entered the woods south of the creek and
plodded back, looking at my tracks going the opposite way. So full of
exuberance was I then! 7 hours later, I was ready to go home. I sank
much deeper in the snow with each step, quickly tiring of the slow
pace. I saw bear tracks paralleling the path just to the right. I had
also seen elk tracks in the forest on the ridge-top.

I was glad to see the car, and spent about twenty minutes changing
clothes, stretching and groaning. Removing socks with elaborate care,
I made sure not to get wet, and tried to keep the car clean. As I
headed south on 35 I saw that a cloud coming from the west had
encircled the mountain, giving it a kind of sombrero. A half hour
brought additional "hats" higher up, each building on the previous
"hat."

Kris and I were glad to see each other at 7:30 that night!

