---
title: Middle Sister
date: 1997-07-27
layout: post
---

This climb was my favorite wilderness event so far. Beautiful weather,
sleeping under the stars, and the excitement of traveling solo made
up for the miserable weather on the AAI
trip. But I did have my share of drudgery, as I'll tell you.



Kris was out of town, and I had a weekend to do something crazy, and
to take my mind off of how much I missed her. I found I didn't like
being at home when she wasn't there. Instead, I worked late, even
playing basketball at midnight in the Intel parking lot (yes, we have
a hoop). So I knew I was going to camp Saturday night, I just didn't
know where. I wanted to try a challenging climb that I could do solo,
or a interesting backpacking trip. Middle Sister won because I knew
the weather would be good, the difficulty seemed a grade higher than
South Sister, and I didn't feel familiar enough with the trails around
Hood, Rainer or Adams to pick out a 2 day backpacking loop.


I got off to a late start Saturday, leaving town about 9:30. After a
lunch in Sisters, I reached the Lava Camp and began walking at 1:30
PM. *Lava Camp you say?  Four miles north of the usual entrance,
are you crazy you say?* Well, my spur-of-the-moment "planning"
revealed a major defect: In order to enter the wilderness at Obsidian
Camp I would have had to get a special permit, only 20 available per
day. Needless to say, I missed the chance, so the ranger suggested I
try Lava Camp.

So I did, worried about the extreme length of the pack in and out. I
hiked for hours, finally stopping just past Sawyer Bar, hopefully only
a mile from the climber's trail. By 7 PM, I was well ensconced in my
camp, sleeping bag on Thermarest on tarp, with good faith that the
weather would hold. As night fell, the wind picked up, forcing me to
move to a more protected area on the leeward side of the hill. Oddly,
the bothersome mosquitoes disappeared at dusk. I woke a few times,
once after midnight to find the wind had utterly stopped, and the
Milky Way reeling above. Shooting stars and satellites lulled me back
to sleep. Tears came to my eyes as I contemplated the sky and my utter
loneliness.  In these moments, you can enter a magical portal and
commune with the vast, lonely wildernesses of our planet, and others.

Anyhow, I woke rather late, and didn't get on my way until 6 am. I ran
and skipped to the climbers trail, crossing larger snowfields as I
drew near Sunshine. I carried a stripped down pack, leaving unneeded
equipment at my camp.  At Sunshine, I filled water bottles at a
spring-fed stream. I followed the footprints in the snow up the
climber's trail, ascending gradually. Where someone had kicked good
steps, I climbed steep snow slopes, ice-ax a trusty companion.  

![Me with South Sister in back](images/metop.jpg)

As the snow became icier, I worried about
reaching the summit because I didn't have crampons. Also, my boots
were 3/4 shank leather, great for the trail, but I felt their
disadvantage in the snow. You can't really get a good hold. When you
kick, your foot skates over the surface leaving you off- balance and
stressing the ankle/foot muscles. *But I trudged on!*

The sun came over North Sister, creating unbearable heat and slowing
me down. The peak appeared, then disappeared behind the next rise. I
reached the 
Renfrew Glacier after ascending three snowfields, each
separated by a rock and scree covered ridge. Up close, tired, with
polarizing glacier glasses on, these rocky sections high on the
mountain really look like a scene from mars. I had fun pretending to
be an astronaut, changing my breathing to simulate an oxygen tank!
Yes, I can be very silly in the mountains, alas...

Crossing the glacier, I saw tiny fleas moving on the summit. Black
flies slid down the slope straight ahead. As I approached, they grew
arms, legs and voices. A party of 6-8 people, they said it was icy on
the last steep snowfield, but a party of Mazamas had installed a fixed
line, and there were good steps. I felt doubly backed-up, and
continued on.

Here, lured by the map, I decided to ascent straight up the summit
cone, rather than heading straight east to the ridge, then south. What
a mistake! Near solid ice repelled my boots, and to avoid losing
altitude I was forced to a scree slope on the left.  *Arrggh, what
a nightmare!* Take a step, take a step, cause a minor but alarming
rock/gravel avalanche, nearly falling, heart pounding, take a step,
*ad infinitum!* I burned at least 30 minutes in this evil
place, wisely shunned by other climbers.

Finally, I escaped by reaching the rocky ridge-top, where the loose
gravel had long since disappeared. I spoke to a man who expressed
bemusement at the fixed lines above. I reached the tricky spot, where
good steps and softening snow allowed me to ignore the rope, which was
at that moment being removed. Who should I find at the top but a
gaggle of Mazamas! I ran into Howard, from the Mt. St. Helens climb,
and the amazing Katie Foehl, who was the leader. I said "Kathy!" (must
be the lack of oxygen) in surprise, and after a beat she remembered
me. We spoke for a few minutes, she expressing surprise that I was
traveling alone, and parked so far away. With an admonishment to be
safe, she and her party set off down the ridge, traveling northeast
across the Hayden Glacier to Pole Creek Camp.


![Near Matthieu Lake. My objective is the snowy middle peak](images/nsister.jpg)


It was really fun to meet someone I knew, in fact, it kind of made my
day through the dismal trudge home. Anyway, almost at the top I met a
man and his circa 10 year old son, who was quite a trooper. They also
headed down and east. Finally, *I was there!* It felt so good
to walk on flat ground, and the view was breathtaking. South Sister,
Broken Top and Mt. Bachelor to the south, Mt.  Washington,
Three-Fingered Jack, Jefferson and Hood to the north. No wind on the
summit, just a ledge of snow, and a ledge of rock. Oh yes, and a
handful of mice!

I ate lunch and chatted with two men who had come up on the south
side, hiking on easy rock. They took my picture here. I had arrived at
11:00 am, and reluctantly turned around at 12:00 PM. Descending
quickly, I stopped to put on snow pants, and began using any excuse to
glissade. I had two or three wild rides, but mostly duds, where I sank
in the snow and had to walk. I was back at Sunshine by 1:30. After
filling my water bottles from the spring, I plodded back to camp,
sinking exhausted on my sleeping bag. I ate and rested, but a
contingent of ants lobbied for my emigration, so by 3:15 I was on my
way, trying not to think of the 8 mile trek ahead of me.

Indeed it was long, and aside from a few moments appreciating the
scenery, it was a torturous journey. Stopping for a rest only made my
feet hurt more when I started again. I was quite amazed to reach the
car at 7:30 PM.

![South Sister and friends](images/ssister.jpg)

There was a section north of South Matthieu Lake with a billion
mosquitoes. Despite a hasty, violent application of bug spray, they
still managed to give me numerous bites on my hands, knees, shoulders
and face. Walking out, with their buzzing in my ear, I felt I was
going mad, making sudden spasmodic motions to clear any away from my
shoulders, where they poked through my shirt to reach fertile skin.

That, and a 3 hour drive back to Hillsboro, and boy...I've had a full
weekend!

