---
title: Ruckle Ridge
date: 1997-06-22
layout: post
---

I had wanted to visit Ruckle Ridge in the Columbia Gorge for some
time, since being told about it on a Mazama hike two months
before. However, circumstances fought me tooth and nail to prevent me
from going, finally settling by allowing me to go, but ensuring a
miserable time!



June was a very busy month for Kris and I. We visited friends in
California, then had my parents come for two weeks, all the while
juggling difficult schedules and barely sleeping. Writing this on the
29th, with my parents safely home in Texas, and a flurry of
gear-buying activity winding down, with Kris sound asleep upstairs,
with many obligations discharged, I can really breath a sigh of
relief. The month has been a success!



My excuse for leaving Kris and my parents at home last Sunday despite
ominous clouds and rain was that I needed to try out the Asolo plastic
boots I planned to rent for the AAI course in July. (See the
St. Helens report for a description of the pain caused by ill-fitting
boots!) There was absolutely no other day available until that trip,
so it had to be today, despite the weather. I required a long,
committing hike, to make sure I got the kind of miles required to see
if the shin-banging pains developed. Ruckle Ridge, as a 9-mile loop,
up the ridge and down Ruckle Creek seemed perfect. I took all my
raingear and arrived at the campground at 12:30 PM, getting a very
late start because Kris needed the car for her flute lesson that
morning.



I began ascending immediately, plastic boots clunking awkwardly,
feeling rather foolish in them. I found solace in the thought that I
must be a serious outdoorsman to go through this just to test
equipment! But I was excited about the ridge coming up. Emerging from
the trees at Buck Point, I admired the view and continued to an
exciting talus slope and went directly up it. Real climbing began at
the top as I used tree roots and rocks to pull myself upward. The rest
of the ridge would have this character: hard-won elevation gain
through arm and leg muscle power, dismaying elevation losses, and lots
of the-top-is-just-over-that-rise feelings. Oh, and lots of freezing
rain and wind, by the way.



Once I was properly on the breathtaking Ridge, with rocky cairns and
drop-offs to the right and left the rain began. It traveled
horizontally from right to left, coming from a big cloudbank at
eye-level one ridge to the west. I could see this cloud moving towards
me, seeming to lose shape as it crossed an intervening valley. The
wind was fierce, knocking me off balance with the heavy pack and
clunky boots. As it picked up I passed two descending day-hikers, both
of whom stared at my boots. I think one of them snickered, but it may
have been the wind.



The boots were doing well, although they rubbed my ankles the wrong
way. Still they were much better than the Koflach boots from
St. Helens. By 4:30, after 4 hours of hard, non-stop climbing, I knew
I had to call it quits. I had planned to be home by 7, and knew that
if I descended, I might not make it until 8:30 as it was. I really
didn't want to descend by the Ridge, since it would be as difficult
going down as up.  But for safety's sake, I did. The frustrating part
was that I had been above the treeline of the ridges on my right and
left for some time, but the top of my ridge never appeared.



Cold, wet, and defeated, I turned back. The latter part of the ascent
had been gentler forested slopes with occasional rock-and-root
scrambling. I made good progress here, running where applicable. The
middle elevation was marked by numerous scrambling passages with near
falls, tripping, and slips on wet rock. I think this section did take
as long going down as it had going up. The lower slope, below the
talus section was regular steep trail hiking with switchbacks. By this
time, my legs were wobbly and I was very tired.



It added up to an 8 hour day with no more than a half-hour of
cumulative breaks, just constant movement against time and cold. The
trip was worthwhile however, providing that special handful of magical
views of mist in the valley on the descent.  Clouds of mist far below
did wonders for my time-panicked, worrisome brain.


