---
title: Mount Saint Helens
date: 1997-05-17
blurb: first climb!
layout: post
---

May 17th-18th, 1997

Mount Saint Helens represents several firsts for me. My first real
mountain climb, my first use of plastic boots, my first camp out in
the snow, and in the Northwest, my first climb with a group, and it
allows me to become a Mazama. The Mazamas are a very old
mountaineering organization, formed in the late 19th century. They
have won fame and praise the world over for their dedication to
education, conservation and knowledge collection in and about the
mountains. They have climbed all over the world.


![](images/summitcert.jpg)

Signing up for a climb is an organized tedious process. You have to
purchase "climb cards," and hope to get accepted on a climb that you
sign up for. My first climb card came back to me in the mail marked
negative. The leader didn't feel I had enough experience. The second
one came back listing me as an alternate. But the very next day, I was
on the climb! I waited with bated breath, reserving my plastic boots
and crampons at REI.

Finally Saturday May the 17th arrived. I reluctantly kissed Kris
goodbye and drove north. The last 3.5 miles of road to the high camp
were blocked, so I trudged up in boots with a heavy pack. I camped
that night with the other party members.

Indeed I had a miserable night! The camp was on snow, and I didn't
bring a ground cover or a Thermarest. A few garbage bags kept my
sleeping bag dry, but I shivered uncontrollably for hours. I passed
the time by creating mock geographical documentaries with the
moonlight-outlined shapes in my tent. "In geological time, this
mountain (my jacket, crumpled) rose very quickly..." Why must I learn
the hard way?

The other team members were very kind. They all knew each other,
seemingly for years. I felt out-of-place, but gradually felt better on
Sunday. I was quite honored to have been chosen, since these climbs
seem to be get-togethers for friends as much as anything else.

Sunday morning, rising at 5 am, I was more than happy to be on the
way. The mountain loomed ahead, the scale impossible to imagine. Would
a walking figure on that expanse of snow and rock be a speck, an inch
high, or not visible at all? Later, looking down on our camp from the
summit, I decided "not visible at all" was the correct choice!

Like true mountaineers, we carried almost everything to be
prepared. Plenty of extra clothing, crampons and ice ax, food,
headlamps, firestarters, first-aid, gaiters, assorted gloves and
mittens, etc. One of the climbers expressed amazement at the
often-seen sight in the mountains of scantily clad people, not even
ready for a light rain. In my short experience, I've already seen the
consequences of such behavior. You get used to the heavy pack, and you
take comfort in the security it provides.

Two miles through the trees, trekking single-file, moving silently and
quickly, the mountain growing larger but more elusive. Then we emerged
in a windblown gully, a steep treeless ridge ahead and other climbers
checking gear. Obviously the way led straight up.  After a break, we
ascended the steepest part. I was very glad for the ice ax, and the
ad hoc usage lesson given by the leader.

I learned the most amazing thing there. The leader set a very slow
pace, resting on a locked knee after each step. We trudged up that
hill without stopping, and continued right on at the top. I was so
excited about this! Had I been alone, I would have zoomed halfway up,
stopping to pant for 5 minutes, then going on for 3 minutes, panting
and huffing for 5 minutes again, etc.

We did the whole mountain that way, and this new skill impressed me as
much as the incredible beauty around me. I was never tired or weary,
and experienced no muscle pain (um, until the next day that
is!). Really, the Mazamas know how to ascend!

It felt so wonderful to be walking up steps cut into the very steep
snow slope, and looking around at the rock and snow cascading across
my vision at weird angles. Every now and then climbers would trade off
cutting steps by kicking the snow with heavy boots. The next climber
would enlarge and define the step. I spent most of my time in this
role, although I did cut steps for a while. I don't think I did very
well, since I was distracted by the view and apprehensive about the
steepness of the slope -- really the experience was kind of
overwhelming!

We stopped on rocky outcrops now and then, quickly chilled by the
wind. After a few minutes of joking and eating, we were again
underway. Finally we approached the summit after a long trudge where I
saw only the boots in front of me.

At the top, a snow covered cliff dropped steeply, thousands of feet to
the lava dome below. This dome was steaming in places, looking like a
giant chocolate chip cookie. To the right and left sharp cliffs
marched. Their attempt to meet opposite me was thwarted by the huge
breach in the mountain, where thousands of tons of pulverized rock
blasted into now-dead Spirit Lake to the north. I couldn't go right to
the edge of the cliff since we were standing on a huge snow cornice,
and couldn't know how far it was safe to walk out before causing a
collapse.

Looking south to Mt. Hood, west to Mt. Adams, and north to the giant
Rainier brought home the fact that I was in a Mountain Kingdom,
surrounded by huge, intelligent sentinels, terrible with power.

We ate lunch, the leader and others congratulations me on my first
peak. Soon I was shivering, and we prepared to descend. The leader
showed me how to "wear" a garbage bag, and hold an ice ax for a
glissade down the mountain. We walked down a little ways, then found a
smooth spot and began to slide, one after the other. Again and again
we repeated this, going faster and faster! Before I knew it, we were
down, and back in the trees.

Here my right shin appeared suddenly bruised by the Koflach plastic
boots. Although I loosened the laces completely, every step became
painful. We moved rapidly through the trees, with me shuffling,
hobbling, or jumping along, wincing all the way. Also the party had to
wait for me because my clothing was all wrong (I had forgotten to put
on shorts after taking off my ski pants, leaving me ridiculous in long
underwear!). Therefore the walk back to the tents was something I'd
rather forget!

Once there, I packed quickly. I wanted to head down to the cars before
the others, since I was afraid my new slow pace would make me a
burden. "As you like," said the leader as I hobbled off with full
pack.

I continued only by will power. Now both shins were bruised and I had
to command myself to walk. I got to the car in just under 2 hours,
walking down a winding road covered with snow, the great views of
surrounding peaks gradually disappearing.

I just beat the others to the cars, despite my long head start. There
we had a beer and a nice time talking and joking. I felt more in tune
with the others than I had before, which felt good. The leader and
assistant leader gave me a summit card, and signed as sponsors on my
Mazamas membership application.

They went to dinner together. I would have liked to, but I really
wanted to see Kris more so I declined. As I drove away I felt better
and better, realizing that I had embarked on a journey of wonder and
challenge.


