---
title: Mt. Timpanogos Attempt
date: 1997-11-07
blurb: ran out of time
layout: post
location: Mount Timpanogos
---

Utah

Friday November 7th, 1997

Kris needed to go to American Fork, Utah for a business trip,
and suggested that I come along for fun. At first I didn't want
to, it meant missing a day of work at an important time, but I
gradually warmed to the idea. Rental car and lodging would be
paid for, we'd just have to pay for my plane ticket.
"Okie-dokie!" I said.

American Fork is situated on the western slope of the Wasatch
front range, a beautiful location, with 11,340 foot high Mount
Timpanogos and other peaks rising behind the city. While Kris
went to work on Friday, I planned to climb this mountain. I
didn't have a map of the area, and this resulted in some
interesting blunders!

I was on the road by 7:00 am, heading north and east under a
beautiful clear sky. 15 minutes later, I was driving into a
canyon and climbing steadily. But oh no! A sign says that the
gate is closed, and my trailhead is several miles past this gate.
I press on, and find that one half of the gate is closed, but I
can dodge into the other lane and get around. Feeling like a
criminal, I drive through the "closed" wilderness, and
reach the Timpanoogee trailhead.

After a few minutes, I encounter big patches of ice on the
trail, which I skate or leap over with trepidation. The trail
climbs slowly up, passing frozen waterfalls. I'm in a "giant
staircase," a canyon with sheer walls dusted with snow, and
flat benches which serve as stairs. Occasionally, the trail
steepens and switchbacks as I climb from one stair to another.
The snow gradually gets deeper, replacing the treacherous ice. 

Around 9000 feet, the views really open up and the wind
becomes colder. Finally, I'm having fun, although all day I'm
worried about the rental car and hoping that officials won't
close the gate!

After the last stair, a 1500 foot high wall must be ascended,
through many tedious switchbacks. The snow gets deeper, and soon
I'm floundering up to my hips in the dry, powdery stuff. The
scenery becomes more alpine, with steep drop-offs, snowfields,
and a huge frozen waterfall.

I'm following in the tracks of someone who came earlier in the
week, and note that they lost patience with the floundering and
headed straight up the slope. I followed, but this was the most
exhausting part of the trip. Sinking deep into the snow, I
strained to retain upward progress, my calves flexed and burning.
I longed for my ice ax, which I didn't attempt to bring on the
plane, and for plastic boots with full shank soles. My leather
boots felt like slippers, constantly coming off of holds.

After more than an hour of extremely slow, painful progress,
an icy wind struck me in the face as I beheld the beautiful
Timpanogos Basin.

A humpy, snow covered collection of hillocks cowering on the
lap of the mountain, with an Emerald lake on the south side, and
other peaks rising all around, the Basin became one of my
favorite alpine retreats. The Timpanogos "glacier"
curved up from Emerald Lake to a ridge. On the other side of the
peak, the same ridge continued north, and I could see where my
trail climbed to meet it. Once on that ridge, I would have
beautiful views to the west, where I would see the now-tiny towns
and cities clustering below.

But alas! It was 11:30, and with the deep snow, I guessed that
it would be another 2 painful hours to the summit. Kris needed a
polarizing filter to do photography on Saturday, and I wanted to
buy this for her while she was at work. I also wanted to spend
the evening with her, rather than racing down the mountain after
dark alone. Clouds had moved in and a rainstorm was predicted for
the next day. Meanwhile, the winds had picked up, and plumes of
snow blew in front of me and behind.

It was not to be...

I lay down on some still-sunny rocks for a while and absorbed
the great silence and majesty of the place, putting on warmer
layers and eating "Nutter-butter" cookies. With a sigh,
I began the descent, promising to return one day.

Going down was a bit hairy due to unstable snow. Usually, I
could plunge-step down very steep slopes, one confident stride
after the other. But entire snowbanks seemed to collapse on my
approach here. Finally, on the last exposed stretch, I resorted
to kicking 10 times with each heel to get to stable snow, my arms
sinking deep into the slope behind me. I did not want to fall
here, as I would be unable to self-arrest.

After that, the rest of the way down seemed easy.
Interestingly, mud that was frozen in the morning had now thawed,
and I splashed and slipped along for miles, sometimes skating on
the mud/ice combination!

Returning to the car at 2:30, I picked up a note on the
dashboard which said: "The gates are locked. Someone will
patrol to let you out."

Oh no! Am I in trouble? When will someone come?!? What will
Kris think!

I got in the car and raced back to the gate. Sure enough, it
was locked, and I was not about to try going around due to the
sheer drop off on one side.

I knew that 15 miles away on the other end of this road there
was a gate...maybe I would have better luck there! I felt like a
kid who had been locked in the mall at night as I zoomed along
the scenic Alpine Loop. I had the place all to myself! I wondered
why the road was closed, since it was in fine condition, and
below the snowline.

Finally, I got to the other gate, and found it locked! But 100
yards down the road was a green truck. I got out and ran to it. A
rugged old man with one arm stood by it and almost before I could
get a word out said: "yeah, yeah, I'll let you out."

I apologized, and felt very embarrassed. "Everybody
screws up sometime," he advised me. I helped him with the
heavy gate and with a wave I was free. He was the only person I
saw all day!

Getting Kris's filter was almost as much of an adventure too!

I brought Kris back the next day to a trailhead that was open,
but the good weather had been replaced with rain and hail. Still,
she got many pictures of icy waterfalls...I hope they come out
well!

