---
title: Martinswand Base Climbs
date: 2018-4-14
blurb: With Vaclav
layout: post
location:
  - Martinswand
---

Vaclav is a funny guy, though alarmingly conscientious. "Let's climb outside
Saturday, on the Martinswand!" I said. The weather forecast was finally good,
after a snowy spring thus far.

"I'll drive, and we can climb the wall 3 times before exhaustion," I went on.
Only as I spoke did I remember that moments before I'd delivered a long and
angry speech about our civilizations failure to step back from growth, from
wasteful use of remaining energy.

Hmm. Most people would let me slide. In fact, I thought sadly, I would have let
myself slide. But finally convictions have to be held or thrown away. It's been
said that climbing is actually an automotive sport. In my quest to be
"productive" (why must I bring the workplace to the peaks?!) I've driven
through the night to be in position before the first rays of the sun touch the
summit cross. Thank God for freeing me from this insane ambition. Now, maybe, I
was ready to listen.

Vaclav, in his characteristic way, wouldn't put anybody down. "Yes, that's an
option!" But a faraway look appeared in his eyes, indicative of "finding
another way."

"Meanwhile I'll look into train and bike options," he concluded cheerfully.

And he did.

And so we did. Take the train.

"140 euros to get two people from Munich to Innsbruck?" I took the news sorely.

"We could also ride our bikes?" offered Vaclav.

"No...let's pay..." I had a vision of myself straining to mantel up onto a rock
on shaky legs, depleted of strength from hours of biking. “FALLING!”

Later in the week I attended a talk, quite wonderful in many ways. It described
marvelous ways we can use technology to solve problems. The world is our
oyster! Our problems are merely challenges, which we, using our big brains will
stride through easily over the next 100 years.

All very bracing. I grew especially excited at tell of a project to re-use
emitted carbon in the environment to provide fuel for vehicles. Results seemed
promising, but then---

Oh. The market spoke. Yes, fuel is simply too cheap. Project canceled.

We returned to our discussion of all the wonderful ways we'll use technology to
solve our..._ad infinitum_.

This soured my mood at first, but then I remembered that I *irrationally* paid 3
times the cost of the gas in my car to get to the Martinswand in order to use a
train that carries many people. I swelled with pride, happy that although my
brain may not be big, I am at least willing to be irrational. And therefore, I
"hurt" the world just a bit less on this fine free day.

After an annoying walk shaped by the needs of vehicles and not walkers, taking
30 minutes to cross various overpasses, we touched shoes to dirt and made the
steep hike up to the routes on the right side of the Martinswand. We decided to
climb "Rucola" (V+) first. I'd done it once before with Barbara. Vaclav was a
quick study, climbing surprisingly fast throughout the day, and having no
trouble with retrieving quickdraws, doing the handoffs, all that good stuff.

Later, he said that the murmuring voices of "the mountain peoples" inside had
begun to stir, and the impression grew stronger throughout the day.

This might explain why he often said "what?" as if he was in a room of loud
voices when I asked how it was going!

Heh, naw, but seriously, we just had great fun in the sun. Vaclav slipped at
the crux move near the end of the route. It's a strange and steep wall that you
traverse into from the right, and then you snake your way up from left back to
right again. The handholds are sparse, and the feet are poor. I was glad he got
to experience a brief fall, maybe just to take the edge off the crazy
experience of being very high up. Either way, he came up pleased and ready for
more.

{% image images/IMG_20180414_124501.jpg %}
Vaclav somewhere on Rucola.

{% image images/IMG_20180414_124508.jpg %}
A "Selfie" that gets us both.


We said hello to a couple of fine fellows sitting at the top. They offered to
share some food with us, but we were intent on climbing the wall for a second
time! That ambition never really goes away...

We lost the way a few times on the faint descent trail, but no matter, soon
enough we were at the bottom. However, the burning sun reminded us of the
desert at this point and I searched for a tiny bit of shade to sit in. Vaclav
joined me, but chose to stand because there was a column of ants busily
collecting material, and by sitting among them confusion would arise. I thought
this silly, but now I'm scratching my back constantly, as several ants had
offered me "feedback" on my careless time with them!

It's often hard to get started on the second climb. We chose "Kaiser Max
Spaetlese" (6-), and waited a bit for a party above to go, then started up. The
first pitch was already nice, climbing an easy grade 4+ face to a belay under
an overhanging corner. The corner had an exciting move, through which I pulled
on gear, purely as illustration for Vaclav.

"Thank you, Michael," he said, knowing how much it had cost me to give up the
exercise of pure strength and power I would have easily displayed for the
passersby, only in order to teach the practical lesson of "French Free."

Higher, things got easier for a while, and then there was a long climbing
traverse to the left, culminating in a very interesting zig-zag ascent, then
partial descent and traverse around the corner to a belay on a ledge. Rather
unusual, but wow, what a spectacular location for photos. I took between 20 and
400 as Vaclav arrived. We moved the belay over to the left side of the ledge
(about 3 meters over), then I headed out for the last pitch with the crux.

{% image images/IMG_20180414_163417.jpg %}
Vaclav on the photogenic Spätlese traverse.

"Good luck!" said Vaclav, and belayed me down and out to the left. I climbed
back up in a shallow gully easily enough, and soon stood directly above Vaclav
at the crux move. You have to clip, then delicately move up and left on a slab
with poor feet and non-existent holds. I cheated for part of this, but I'd like
to go do it again! Sustained slabby climbing continued for 2 more clips, then
things got easier. Very nice!

Vaclav worked on the crux for a while, searching for the best way. As is
completely normal for the first time on such terrain, he finally pulled through
and emerged wondering how the heck you climb that.

This was my chance to look world-weary and seasoned. I stared into the
distance. "There are ways, my friend...there are ways..." I'd momentarily
forgotten that I'd gripped a quickdraw in my tight little fist and cheated my
way shamelessly onto the slab.

And so it goes!

{% image images/IMG_20180414_182158.jpg %}
She, the Martinswand!

This time we only got lost twice on the descent, and soon we were pounding the
pavement back to the train station. I'd been dreaming of radler and Fanta and
anything like that, visualizing exchanging coins and bills for ice-chilled
containers of colorful liquid. There was a gas station, and we almost walked by
it.

"What are you going to get, Vaclav?" I asked, already wondering what additional
chemical additives I could load into my bloodstream.

"Oh, nothing. But perhaps we'll find a restaurant..." he said.

Only after a few more paces did I realize: he *doesn't want to bring more
plastic into the environment, where it will inevitably end up choking a seagull
some months hence. Ach.*

Man, he's right!

Nursing my thirst with pride like a martyr, I joined him for the final walk to
the train station, happy to suffer that this seagull may live!

We waited a while, then the train took us to Innsbruck. Here, we looked in vain
for a restaurant that suited our rather refined sense of what would be "nice."
Why do train stations only have Doener shops and gambling dens? I saw how
darned hard it is to find a place that uses glasses instead of pointing you to
a refrigerator full of plastic.

At the last minute, we found an old-style hotel, with a fantastic bar. Ahh!

Vaclav order not 1 but 2 non-alcoholic beers! What a glutton...

I ordered only one, but with alcohol, and then followed it up with another at
the Kufstein station an hour later. Therefore I only remember the tail end of
our train conversation, in which I was loudly asserting I was more of a
feminist than most, and how much I resented the term being used in a small,
"tit-for-tat" way in ongoing petty cultural wars.

I looked around, and we seemed to have the train car to ourselves. There was
only Vaclav, smiling gently, and as usual, expressing a kind of gratitude to
all the things around. Finally I quieted down, wondering what all the fuss was.

We'd had a great day. We'd considered our impact. We'd climbed.

These are good things.

Thanks Vaclav!

{% image images/IMG_20180414_221811.jpg %}
A lady was just married, and this was random!

