---
title: The Dolomites, Italy
date: 2001-6-15
layout: post
location:
  - Cinque Torri
  - Torre Wundt
  - Col Rosa
  - Falzarego Towers
---

* June/July, 2001


Kris and I were very happy that we could fit all of our clothes and climbing
gear into 2 full size carry ons and 2 small backpacks, so we didn't
have to check anything in.

We flew directly from Seattle to Amsterdam Saturday afternoon.  We
have never seen SEA-TAC airport so crowded, we were so glad we didn't
have to stand in what looked like a 2 hour line!

While we were waiting for the plane, we noticed a young guy dressed to
the nines in a cowboy outfit with a pink and purple fanny pack and a
large Alaska belt buckle. i thought it was very strange and Michael
guessed that he was a tourist that thought that's how Americans
dressed. Sure enough, we sat right next to him and it turns out he was
a Dutch guy who went on a camping tour from Seattle to Alaska.  He
loves his western wear (his previous trips to the states have been to
Montana and Colorado) although he left his cowboy boots at home since
he couldn't fit it in his backpack. We (mostly Michael) had a good
time talking to him about the mountains in Washington.

The flight wasn't too bad and we felt pretty good at the Amsterdam
airport. It was a 9+ hour flight and Amsterdam is 9 hours ahead so we
arrived at 8am.  It wasn't a huge culture shock as all the signs were
in Dutch and English.  We had a bad experience there though.  I have
heard from various sources that there is a chance that the airport
security x-ray machines will ruin film, no matter what speed film it
is.  I didn't want to pass my film through the x-ray machine but the
security guy said that it was my problem and not his.  He then threw
my whole bag of film through the machine!  I was very upset!!!  I'm
keeping my fingers crossed that none of the rolls are ruined.

From there, we took a KLM flight to Milan and we were very pleased
that the chairs on the flight were HUGE - almost business class!  On a
plane that usually has 3 chairs on each side, they have 2 on one and 3
on the other and made the chairs/armrests bigger to take up that extra
space. We flew over the Swiss alps and got a breathtaking view!

When we got out of the airplane, we walked towards the exit and
realized that we didn't get our passports stamped. We talked to other
US citizens that were around us and they said "oh yes, you NEED to
get it stamped."  It was hell trying to get back in to where the
customs agents are.  I found out that if you have a US passport, you
do not need to get it stamped in Europe.  I asked three different
people at the airport to confirm this.  There are hardly any signs in
English and only few people speak English so we felt very lost.  All
the books we read did not prepare us for this!

After that adventure, we found our way to an ATM got some money and
promptly put it into our money belts.  We went to the train shuttle
station and bought a ticket to the central train station in Milan.  We
went down to the tracks and there was a train waiting there that said
"Milan Nord."  We weren't exactly sure if that was our train so we
asked around and no one spoke English and we didn't have our
phrasebook handy.  We finally found someone who did speak English and
told us that we were on the right train (this is after we were halfway
there).  If it wasn't our train, we don't know what we would've done!

We got off at the main train station and went to the window to buy our
tickets to Bolzano.  We found out that we were at the wrong station
(Cordona) and we needed to take the subway to the main train station.
There is no direct train from the airport to the central station.
Going down into the subway was quite an experience, very dark and
dirty and again, we had no idea which train to get on.  We saw a whole
bunch of people boarding a train so we decided to get on too.  Whether
it was the right one or not, we had no idea.  We found a map on the
train and figured out that it was the right one.  The subway train is
very loud and screechy!

![Milano Centrale train station](images/articles/trips/2001/milantrainstation.jpg)

We got off at the right stop and took an escalator to the street.  It
was a really cool sight to surface onto the streets of Milan looking
up to the huge structure of the train station.  It was incredibly hot
and we were not prepared for it!  We were both wearing long sleeved
shirts.  We bought our tickets to Bolzano, although we were confused
as to which train to board.  We needed to take a train first to
Verona, then from Verona to Bolzano.  The woman at the window told us
to catch the 14:05 train, but didn't tell us which track.  There was a
train to Venice that left at 14:05 and a train to Verona at 14:15.  It
was 13:50 so we had very little time to figure out which train we
needed to board.  Michael ran around trying to ask someone with no
luck.  We saw an official looking person that spoke very little
English that told us that the Venice train was the correct train.  So,
we got on and crossed our fingers!

We were very thirsty as there are no water fountains hardly anywhere
and we didn't have time to stop and buy some water.  Michael left the
bags with me and went out to find some.  After about 20 minutes, he
came back and i was so relieved, I was dying of thirst!  I think the
last time I was that dehydrated was when we ran out of water climbing
at Red Rocks near Las Vegas.  I opened the bottle and was so happy to
be FINALLY drinking some water.  I took a sip and nearly gagged.  It
turns out that it was carbonated water.  How do people drink this
stuff?  It was the only water I had, Michael said I had to suffer with
it.  Going back to get another bottle would have taken too long.


![Michael on the train to Verona](images/articles/trips/2001/onthetrain.jpg)

We first sat in a compartment but then we got kicked out because it
was reserved for a bunch of loud teenage German girls.  So we had to
sit in the aisle, they had these "pop out" chairs that we could use.
About half way to Verona, a woman in another compartment left and the
people in there made room for Michael and I.  They were a family from
New York and we started talking about climbing.  They said that they
live near the Gunks and that we should visit them.  We were amazed at
their generosity and exchanged addresses.

There was slight confusion as to which train to transfer to but we
found a timetable and figured out where we needed to go.  I found a
water fountain that i could empty out my carbonated water and put in
regular water.  Ahhh, it was very nice!

We found some seats and was amazed at how less crowded that train was.
It turned out that we were sitting in the first class section and we
were booted into the second class section.  I cannot describe the heat
we endured!  That second train was long and slow, so it took awhile to
get to Bolzano.  The only chairs we found was next to this girl that
was sleeping and she ' had her legs up next to the chair across from
her.  Michael had to "form-fit" around her with one leg up and over
one of the arm rests.  Funny, I always pictured train riding as almost
like taking a plane - air conditioned and pleasant.

Michael used the bathroom and heard a strange sound.  He then realized
that the toilet was just a "hole" and everything was being emptied
directly onto the tracks! hmmm...

We finally made it to Bolzano but then realized that we had no idea
how to get to our hotel (Kolpinghaus).  Michael left the bags with me
and ran around Bolzano to find it - they did say that they were five
minutes away from the station.  He came back 15 minutes later with no
luck.  I saw a "local" looking guy and decided to ask him for
directions.  He spoke very little English but with Michael's knowledge
of German (in the South Tyrol region of Italy, most people speak
German first and Italian second), we managed to understand his
directions.  We started walking and I think we looked so pathetic that
he offered to walk us there.  He even carried one of our bags!  We
were on guard as we were just reading about all the petty theft that
happens - Michael and I were ready to run after him should he decide
to take off with our bag.  It turns out that he was a very genuine guy
and extremely nice.  He liked the opportunity to practice his English.
Since he was so nice, we invited him to come to dinner with us after
we checked into our hotel.  He was really surprised that we offered
and gladly accepted.

His name is Daniel and he was born in Bolzano and is a musician
(clarinet and accordion teacher) and also loves to ski.  He is
currently practicing some pieces to play in a worldwide(?) symphony
and has concerts in Switzerland in July.  We went to his favorite
pizzeria - Pizzeria Partenope - and had a lot of fun talking about so
many things.  It's amazing what you can do with a German/English
dictionary and hand gestures.


![Michael with our new friend Daniel](images/articles/trips/2001/michaelanddaniel.jpg)

Michael's gesturing of "crowded" and "fence" were extremely funny
(at least to me).  It was so wonderful to have Daniel there!  I found
a new drink that I like - Spetzi - which is Coke and Fanta mixed
together.  Michael liked Radler, which is beer and coke mixed
together.  I also had my first grappa, which is a really, really
strong drink, sort of like vodka but it burns as it goes down.  You
can sip it or do it as a shot.  Someone at our work said that the
locals drink grappa, so we had to at least try it!  We ordered pizza,
of course, and this restaurant has 80 combinations of pizza!  It was
wonderful!  It turns out that Daniel loves computers so he was really
impressed that we both work for Microsoft.  His girlfriend called on
his cell phone (every Italian has at least one) during dinner and so
we got on that subject - turns out he has many girlfriends all over
Italy and he said that it's hard to keep them from finding out about
each other.  Quite the player!  It was a fun evening and he was just
so blown away when we told him that he would pay for his meal.  Dinner
for three including drinks came out to about $25!  After dinner, he
gave us his personal tour of the central area of Bolzano and it was
such an amazing place - just what we pictured small town Italy to be
like!  Very romantic with narrow streets and tall buildings crowding
on each other and people walking at night.  He also told us where to
get the best gelati in Bolzano, but it was closed so we couldn't get
any that night.

We went back to the hotel and discovered lots of strange things.  We
were confused about the towels, imagine that!  There is a big linen
sheet that I'm guessing is a washcloth (still trying to figure that
one out) and then a more absorbent cloth, which we used as a towel, we
don't know for sure if it is one - but it was in the bathroom so it
must be.  The room was very narrow so the twin beds couldn't be put
side by side, It was top to bottom.  I think in Europe there is almost
no such thing as a king or queen sized bed.  It's usually two twins
put together.  The beds were very HARD and forget about air
conditioning!  We slept with the window opened and listed to the
birds, people passing by, motor scooters and cars.  We were so tired
that the noise didn't bother us at all!  What a day!




![Morning in Bolzano](images/articles/trips/2001/bolzanomorning.jpg)

![Alleyway in Bolzano](images/articles/trips/2001/bolzanoarches.jpg)

I got up at 2am because I was just too excited to stay asleep and
because we had to keep the window open since the room was so hot.  We
both finally got out of bed at 5:30am (can you believe it?  For those
of you who don't know our sleeping habits, we're NOT morning people)
and walked around Bolzano.



It was such a neat experience, It made us really like Bolzano, it was
a very quiet morning (but still hot) and we went to a bakery and
bought something that looks and tastes like a very large donut and an
apple something or another.  We also saw some very strange looking
cars, some that were smaller than 6 feet long!



We went back to our room and I took a short nap - falling asleep to
the sounds of cars, scooters and someone playing the flute from the
music conservatory next door.  Michael went on an adventure to find
some shaving cream and a phone card.  He first went to a farmacia
(pharmacy), which is strictly a pharmacy and is not like our "drug
store."  When he couldn't find it there, he stopped and asked someone
where to get shaving cream (had a hard time explaining what he wanted
but suddenly remembered the italian word for it - crema da barba) and
the guy told him that he had to go to a tabacci shop, which probably
has the most products per square foot than any other type of store.


![Streets of Bolzano in the shadow of a terraced hillside](images/articles/trips/2001/bolzanohillside.jpg)

We picked up our rental car - a Fiat Punto - and I was so relieved
that the guy said that it had air conditioning!  The car was small,
but not "funny" small.  It was more like a small Honda Civic
hatchback.  And of course, it DIDN'T have air conditioning!  We had to
make do with rolling the windows down.  There is a button marked
"city" and we have no idea what it is for.



We made our way to Cortina d'Ampezzo via the direct and scenic, but
stressful and scary route!  The road was much curvier than the map
made it look.  Picture a residential two way street "on a diet" then
make it go through very hilly landscape with a billion switchbacks.
Then picture motorcycles, cars and very large tour busses in your lane
going around blind curves at 50mph!  The roads resemble hiking trails
more than driving terrain!  After about 2 hours of this, I got motion
sickness and we had to stop and walk around for awhile.  We got the
first look at the Dolomites and they were just incredible!  We
eventually made it to Cortina after 3 very stressful hours.  Michael
did very well though, he said that he feels "at home" with driving
here.  Maybe it reminded him of being 18 again?




![Rifugio Cinque Torri](images/articles/trips/2001/rifugioct.jpg)


We then drove up a ONE lane street to the Rifugio Cinque Torri.  If
you thought the two lane streets were bad, this was way worse!  At
least we went at a good time when there wasn't too many cars going the
opposite direction.  There is one very blind curve at the top that we
nearly had a head on collision!  ACK!  We made it there alive and well
but found out that the Cinque Torri Huette was full for the night.
There was another Rifugio that was 5 minutes away (for a Sasquatch, 30
minutes for the lay person) but they didn't open until July 1.  We
noticed that the air was very thin - we were at 7000 ft - so it was
very hard to walk uphill.  At first I thought I was just way out of
shape, but Michael was having a hard time also and since he is
experienced being at high elevations, he knew that it was the air.




![Hotel San Marco - Our home for about 1.5
weeks](images/articles/trips/2001/hotelsanmarco.jpg)

We decided to stay in Cortina that night and an Italian couple helped
us make a reservation at the hut for the next night.  The husband said
that he didn't speak English then later went on to tell us about his
trip to Aspen, Colorado!  We were a little disappointed with Cortina
(especially after liking Bolzano so much) - it is a resort town with
no real culture.  It has a billion places to stay and 80 restaurants
serving only Italian food.  The views are incredible though and Winter
and August are the busiest times.  A lot of places were still closed
(open July 1) but we kind of liked that it was empty.  We stayed in a
place called the Hotel San Marco, right across from the main church.
Our friends, Peter and Kim, stayed here last year and highly
recommended it.  It is very reasonable and centrally located so we
don't have to drive when we're in town.  The rooms are very quiet
since it has double doors.  Right when we arrived, there was a funeral
procession going on - the church bells were ringing and hundreds of
people walked out of the church almost single file following a hearse
through town.  I'm so used to seeing cars in a line, not people, it
was very interesting and humbling.  We took a nap and woke up too late
to have dinner so we just went hungry.


06.26.01: Our first climb - Via delle Guide (by Michael)
------------


![On the way to our first climb](images/articles/trips/2001/onthewaytoct.jpg)
![Leading the first pitch of Via delle
Guide](images/articles/trips/2001/vdg1stpitch.jpg) 
![Kris on the route](images/articles/trips/2001/krisvdg.jpg)
![On the summit!](images/articles/trips/2001/viadelleguidesummit.jpg)
![Michael scrambling unroped!](images/articles/trips/2001/michaelscramble.jpg)


I was so excited! It was time to climb in Italy!  What would the rock
be like? From the pictures, I expected it to be chossy and horrible,
ready to break off at any moment. In fact, while I was writing this, a
Canadian man walked up and asked me what the rock was like. He was so
sure it would be bad that he didn't bring his rope. tsk tsk...No more
"soup" for him!  We made that horrid drive up to the hut again, this
time with no scary incidents!  [Michael was rushing me since he saw a
busload of climbers coming. -Kris]

We hiked up, making a few route-finding mistakes, but finally coming
beneath the 300-foot high face of Torre Grande's West Summit.  The
route was the "Via Della Guide," first climbed in 1930. In front of
us, another party was finishing the first pitch. There is an
overhanging section of rock here, and the follower above was having a
nervous time. Fidgeting and murmuring in German, he was making Kris
nervous too! But then I was climbing, and finally after much
speculation found that the rock was wonderful. What looks like
"choss," is just a mottled pattern of black and gray rock. And the
holds can be gripped like video-game joysticks.  Quickly, I arrived at
the overhang, and overcame it with a large baseball bat hold. I found
a belay station made up of one cemented piton. Cement? Soon I would
grow used to this, but for the first time, I had to back it up with
gear. Kris surprised herself by climbing through the overhang with no
fuss, no muss! Wow, the sun was out and we were climbing!


We climbed another pitch up easy rock, then a delightful climbing
traverse to beneath a great overhang of rock.  Stopping to take
pictures at every chance, we were enjoying ourselves greatly. Then a
pitch with a hard start, protected by an iron piton. In general, it
was hard to find protection with my gear. I felt that you need pitons,
especially knifeblades for the compact rock here. I used small to
medium cams, and small nuts, but I finally quit carrying larger cams,
as I never found a place for them.  Anyway, back to the climb.


There was one pitch left, and it ends spectacularly with fun climbing
right to the summit - an isolated block about 20 feet square. Here we
took more pictures, hugged, hung out a while, and made the first of
three rappels to a steep trail. We had really had the route to
ourselves, something we wouldn't get again. On the short-but-steep
hike back to our boots, we met Carl from Spokane, WA. He had just
finished the "via Miram" on the South Summit.  Everybody's happy!


There was a local pinnacle that looked close enough to climb while
Kris took a nap. I got my boots on and ran down into a valley, up the
other side and met up with a trail going to Passu Giau. I followed
this beautiful trail through heather down a gully, then to a long
traverse of a mountain side. I kept my eyes open for a way over to the
peak, and finally found a ridge that should work.  Enjoying the
exploration, I was soon below the peak, where I followed steep scree
and heather to a saddle with a cairn. I found an expensive tripod head
here! Steeper, exposed scree and rock led to the summit, which had a
spectacular view in all directions. It took 50 minutes to get here,
but it was special because there were no signs of previous passage,
and I didn't even know what it was called. I looked down on the
rifugio for a while, then carefully descended. I tore my pants on
sharp rock, and Kris repaired them for me with the tiny sewing kit
that came with our toiletry bag!


I came back and took a small nap with Kris but that was a big mistake
because we missed dinner!  The couple that runs the place felt bad for
us and gave us some speck (smoked pork) and awful smelling cheese.  It
was really bad smelling.  It was gross.  We gagged.  Michael said it
was like a decomposing rhinoceros.  Like the night before, we went to
bed hungry.


![Enjoying the view](images/articles/trips/2001/michaelenjoyingview.jpg)
![Kris and I on a belay ledge](images/articles/trips/2001/atbelayledge.jpg)
![Kris in awe of the incredible view](images/articles/trips/2001/krisrapvdg.jpg)
![The Cinque Torri](images/articles/trips/2001/cinquetorri.jpg)



06.27.01: Locked in the hut but at least Torre Lusy is conquered!
----------

![Sunrise picture from the Rifugio balcony](images/articles/trips/2001/cinquetorrisunrise.jpg) 

Wednesday we were up at 4 am to take pictures of the sunrise, but to
our surprise the Rifugio door was locked! We had figured to take
pictures then get an early start on the climbing, but endured a few
tortured hours in our room and the upstairs balcony.  I figured I
could escape via the W.C. window, and we also could have rappelled
from the balcony, but it probably wasn't worth the furor it would
cause. I was especially worried about the bus full of climbers that
arrived at nine yesterday and took over the tower we wanted to
climb. It might happen again.



But finally, since we missed dinner the night before, we had to stay
until breakfast at 7:30. We had yet more bread, and a sort of
applesauce/baby-food "juice drink," and finally left the hut at 8
am. It was already quite hot.



![Michael off route](images/articles/trips/2001/michaeloffroute.jpg) 
![Max on the first pitch of Torre Lusy](images/articles/trips/2001/maxtorrelusy.jpg)

With a vague conception of where Barranco tower was, we climbed up the
trail behind the hut. We came to snowy scree gullies and decided to
follow a way trail around the towers.  Up and down we went, guessing
about the tower and being wrong several times. Finally, we circled all
the way to the start of via della Guide, hiked up the gully to our
rappel point from the day before, and realized our tower was down
steep scree all the way back to where we started! And even worse, the
climber bus had arrived, and I counted 16 climbers milling around the
base of the route we wanted! Eeeyyy...


It turns out we were mistaken about the tower names, and also, the
climbers at the base were queuing up for Torre Lusy.  But not knowing
that, I started climbing a more intimidating route just to the right
(via del diedro on Torre Romana).  It was well protected, but went up
a steep, even overhanging at parts, corner with some reachy
moves. Coming out on a ledge, I was a little worried about how Kris
would find it. I then followed a line of bolts onto a face and a belay
point. Estimating the climb to be a stiff 5.7, I thought about
rappelling from there, since I had just enough rope. Kris came up
halfway, then I lowered her because it was just too hard for her. She
had to pull on every piece of pro and still couldn't make it. I had
used all my slings so it was difficult to set the rappel and finally
escape. Once down, we walked around the corner to the more classic
climb, and ran into two guys inspecting it. The crowds had
disappeared.




![Kris belaying on the last pitch](images/articles/trips/2001/kristllastpitch.jpg)
![Michael on the 40m free hanging rappel](images/articles/trips/2001/michaelraptl.jpg)

These two were Max, an Italian living in St. Louis, and Carl, a fellow
Washingtonian from Spokane. The route looked quite steep, and with
Kris having just been repelled from a climb, we wanted something
easy. Carl's guidebook described a route just to the left on Lusy, 5
pitches of 5.4 (*Via Lusy Pompanin*).  It looked like a fun route.
There was a crowd of climbers above, but we wouldn't run into them. We
needed to do a 50 meter rappel, so we combined our teams and ropes (we
each had one 60 meter).



Max and Carl went first, and Kris and I came behind. The climb started
out tough, with steep polished holds in a moat between snow and
rock. But once the ridge is gained, the climb was really fun, having
the same beautiful holds as Via Della Guide. Carl and Max climbed
slowly, Carl had just ended a two year moratorium on leading, and Max
felt that leading a climb was a sure way to die! So we spend time
conversing with Max on ledges, and admiring the views of Tofana. Each
pitch had one small difficulty, such as a crack or polished holds. The
day was clouding up, and there was a wind blowing.



Abruptly, on pitch 4, a swarm of 6 climbers came up rapidly while Carl
was leading out. One was unroped, and the others were from Val Gardena
(Italy). Max said that townspeople there learn to climb at age
3. Indeed, they were a swarm, and it was


![Carl, Max and Michael waiting out the hailstorm](images/articles/trips/2001/carlmaxmichael.jpg)

all I could do to lead up right on Max's tail to prevent them from
swarming over and passing in a huge glut. Kris, belaying me on the
ledge with this group later said they were trying to find a way around
me, and only quieted when they realized they couldn't do it. Still,
they weren't rude, just a bit unnerving. Naturally, Kris climbed this
interesting and steep pitch quickly. As the clouds darkened, Carl went
up for a final pitch to a ledge below the summit. I climbed just
behind Max, clipping to their gear to save time, since a light rain
had started. Kris arrived and we soon were at the rappel
point. Thunder had started, and we were filled with a sense of
urgency. Kris and I enjoyed the 40m long free rappel, and the knot
came down easily.




![Us with the very hard working Rifugio owner](images/articles/trips/2001/rifugioowner.jpg)

Once on the ground, a hailstorm developed, and we took shelter under a
(suitably bolted!)  overhang while painful bullets of ice fell and
lighting cracked in the sky. Carl shared some food he had - sandwiches
and smoked (?) sausages that were very prehistoric looking, old and
wrinkled like it was 50 years old.  I enjoyed the sausage but Kris
couldn't eat it once she found out it was made out of mountain goat!
Soon we were drinking back at the hut with Carl, Max and their
traveling companions - Doug, Cindy and Mary Frances. Kris had a
Spetzi (coke and Fanta), and I had a beer.  Max shared his Williams,
kind of a pear vodka, which is now one of Kris's favorite drinks.



We headed back to Cortina and went to the local climbing shops and ate
dinner at the 5 Torri restaurant (pretty crappy).  Michael discovered
that he doesn't like polenta and the spaghetti tasted like fast food.
they are also not big on garlic.  bummer.  Kris decided to make some
calls to home and spent about 10 minutes trying to figure out how to
use the phone card.  You need to break off this piece of plastic in
the corner before the machine would take it.  Go figure!




Michael considered climbing today since when we got up there were
patches of blue sky.  We were told yesterday that the weather would be
bad.  By the time we got ready, the sky was totally cloudy so we
decided to run some errands.  We had our morning breakfast and talked
to some Canadians.



We went to the local tourist office and found out that Cortina does
not have a laundromat.  They did have one at some point but it went
out of business.  There are some at campsites on the outskirts of town
but you need to be a guest to use them.  We called one of them and
asked if we could pay the guest fee, use the laundry facilities and
not actually stay, but they said that we had to physically stay there.
Ridiculous!  They also have a dry cleaning business but it would take
2 days and cost a fortune to wash t-shirts, socks and underwear!  We
also found out where the Internet point was (very important) and spent
a couple of hours writing email.



The weather was really bad and it rained hard almost all day.  Michael
bought some laundry detergent and I did laundry in our hotel sink.  My
arms were throbbing after an hour or so of washing clothes.  I am so
glad I don't have to do this at home!  I also got some film developed
(didn't want to worry about film being damaged on the way home) and
wrote some postcards.


We took an afternoon drive to Dobbiaco/Toblach and took some pictures
along the way.  There was a very picturesque scene of cows in a field
amongst cloud covered mountains.  We found a small (VERY small)
worship area perched on the side of a steep hill with a one lane dirt
road up to it.  It had six tiny pews that if the church were packed,
it would fit about 12 very thin people.



We came back to Cortina and ate dinner at Hotel de la Poste and it was
a nice change of pace from the pizzerias but it wasn't anything to
write home about.  Wait a minute, I am writing home about it now.
hmm...  But it's not a good writing home - the steaks were very raw,
almost cold in the middle and that was cooked medium!  I had to send
my steak back 2 or 3 times for it to be only slightly pink.


![Many cows in a field](images/articles/trips/2001/manycows.jpg) 
![Michael on a bench at Lake Misurina](images/articles/trips/2001/lakemisurina.jpg)


![Small church perched on a hill above Dobbiaco](images/articles/trips/2001/smallchurch.jpg)


06.29.01: We climb the Falzarego Towers and went the wrong way down! (by Michael)
--------

![The first Falzarego Tower](images/articles/trips/2001/falzaregotower.jpg)
![Lonely park bench in Marmotland](images/articles/trips/2001/ftparkbench.jpg)

Today was our first chance at a big climb. Torre Piccola, one of the
two Falzarego Towers had a 30 minute approach from the road, and
offered 7 pitches of climbing to grade IV+.  Supposedly the climb
should take 1.5 hours, and the descent a mere 45 minutes. Great!  We
didn't bring a lunch, fully expecting to be back in town by 2 PM or
so. I roused a sleepy Kris, and we made the now-familiar drive to
Falzarego Pass. We found a faint trail leading away from the road,
then steeply up to intersect a wide path between the pass and the
Rifugio Dibona. After a few minutes on this path, we found an amazing
ruin: a collection of WWI-era barracks, crumbling amid greenery and
spires of rock. A herd of deer grazed at the upper end of the
abandoned buildings, and a trio of marmots entertained Kris for some
time. She was inspired, and took some great photos while I took a
steep path up to the base of the route. I looked for a painted
"#10" on the cliff, which marked a start to the route. Despite
letters 4 feet high, I didn't see it until I had scrambled almost on
top of it. I descended to the barracks and brought a reluctant Kris
up.



![Michael is loving the rock!](images/articles/trips/2001/michaelftbighand.jpg)
![Can you find our route?](images/articles/trips/2001/ftroute.jpg)

Then began an adventure in route finding. I climbed to the right of
the "#10", for the easier way indicated in the guidebook. But the
rock led me up on an obvious route through a crack. Finally, a few
vertical moves, and I had reached a bolted belay. I didn't think Kris
would like that, and looking to the next pitch there was a 12 foot
slightly overhanging crack to surmount. Wow. Indeed, Kris came up
through difficult climbing, and I lowered her from the belay and
rappelled myself.  During this time, a horde of about 20 climbers had
arrived on an easier approach, and were already swarming around and
over me. We decided to follow a group we had run into the day before,
as their route looked like the true easy start. We climbed one pitch
easily, then I tried to follow this group on the next pitch which went
up and right, rather than left as the topo indicated. Initially easy
terrain became loose and unpleasant. I ended up down-climbing most of a
pitch, and making for a long leftward traverse as the topo
indicated. This was the right move, and soon Kris arrived on a
spectacular traverse. We had now caught up with a small crowd.  I
shared belay ledges with a girl from Bolzano (Elana) who spoke German
with a strange accent. But she could speak a little English, and as we
climbed higher her desire to get away from the unrelenting exposure
became quite strong! By the barracks were two helicopter pads with a
circled red "H." Kris and I saw these H's get smaller and smaller,
and since the route is on an arete (ridge) for most of the way, the
space and air surrounding us was intoxicating. Kris's solution was to
not look down for a while!



![WWI Army barracks at the base of the climb](images/articles/trips/2001/ftarmybarracks.jpg) 
![Kris admiring the view from high above](images/articles/trips/2001/krisfalzaregotowers.jpg)

For the third pitch, I climbed behind Elana, and got good gear
placements while I waited for her to complete a hard move. The pitch
ended with a vertical chimney, and I set a gear belay off to the side,
since one party belayed off a chockstone and another was using the
bolts. This belay station was quite a bottleneck. People seemed a
little tense though, and no one talked to me except Elana. I knew Kris
would find this climbing harder, so I mentally visualized where she
was with each stop and start of the rope. She found it difficult, but
we were both pleased that she climbed the pitch solidly. For locals,
this pitch felt like a longer first pitch of Midway on Castle Rock.


Pitch four really got my attention, as it was the crux in terms of
difficulty and exposure. You start by climbing onto the crest of the
arete with an overhang below


![Kris getting comfy on the belay seat](images/articles/trips/2001/krisftsitbelay.jpg)

you, so you can feel space all around. Then there was a difficult move
getting above a piton at an overhang. I worked straight up and left to
a sort of chasm, placing much needed gear before committing to a
delicate rightward traverse. Whew! I felt that if Kris could climb
this, we were home free, as the remaining 4 pitches were easier. And
she came up really well, only having problems with the short traverse.
I know we were both a little tense here because we didn't take
pictures of pitch 3 or 4, although they offered the most interesting
climbing. But our relief was great as we climbed two easy pitches
right on the ridge crest. The parties ahead got far enough above us
that we had the route to ourselves again. Pitch 7 had some tricky
route-finding, sending me on a blank-looking rightward ascent, then
back left.  After one more easy pitch Kris tentatively stood on the
summit, and said she was glad we had done this. She couldn't exactly
say it was fun, but it was fulfilling in a way that mere fun doesn't
provide. I felt really close to her and proud of her, because it
seemed that she understood what motivates me to climb. But the most
trying work was still ahead of us!


We climbed down about 40 feet of 4th class rock to a rappel station
into the notch between the two towers. After a long rappel, we
attached the rope between us, and started down a steep gully with
blocks of snow. Here began an education in short-roping.  I would
usually go down ahead, and Kris would follow. Squeezing between snow
and

![Michael on the summit of the Falzarego Towers](images/articles/trips/2001/michaelftsummit.jpg)

rock, we even climbed past a few rappel stations that didn't seem
necessary. At one point I set a belay and lowered Kris past a small
overhang. I was able to down-climb it once she scouted that it had
hidden footholds. After the gully, we faced a sea of steep heather and
gravelly rock. Although we didn't know it at the time, we made a wrong
turn here, which bought us another hour of delicate, exposed
descent. We followed a faint path down to more rock scrambling. At
points along here, I would make some moves, and protect Kris by
looping the rope over rock horns. Kris climbed carefully and without
complaint. Finally we reached a tree at the top of a disintegrating
slope (hummocks of dirt would crumble under your feet) and saw that
two rappels would reach our packs. We left a sling around the tree,
and had to be extra careful not to knock rocks loose during the
rappel. Finally, we were "home", safely back at the start of the
route. More down-climbing to the wide path, and a hike back to the
car. I don't remember the exact time, but I can say that this route
took us all day long. We were starving, and immediately drove to
Cortina and barged into the nearest restaurant for food.


We had dinner at the Hotel Cortina it was wonderful, way better than
the Hotel de la Poste!  It was almost completely empty, and we
couldn't figure out why.  The service was excellent and food was
extremely delicious!  We think it's because the rush season hasn't
really started yet.  Kris had the spaghetti w/fresh tomato sauce and I
had the pepper steak. It was the personal recipes of the
bartender/waiter, Marco.  He cooked the meals in front of us and put
on quite a show!  The food was cheap but the drinks expensive but we
had such a trying day, I allowed myself to drink Coke!  It was 7000
lire ($3) for a very small bottle (8oz?).  We went to bed very tired
but also very satisfied for finally finding a place that served
excellent food!



06.30.01: Our first gondola ride to Rifugio Laguzuoi! (by Michael)
----------

![Rifugio Laguzuoi](images/articles/trips/2001/rifugiolaguzuoi.jpg) 
![Michael enjoying the view](images/articles/trips/2001/laguzuoiview.jpg) 
![Another view from the Rifugio](images/articles/trips/2001/laguzuoiview2.jpg) 
![Ready for Action!](images/articles/trips/2001/michaelatlaguzuoi.jpg) 
![Castle build in the year 1000](images/articles/trips/2001/rockcastle.jpg)

We just had to sleep in a while after such a big day, but we still had
ambitions!  The goal was to climb a via ferrata on the mountain Col
Rosa. After running various errands, we arrived at the trail-head
around 10 am. The book described a hike of 500 meters elevation gain
to get there, and we gamely started up the road looking for a trail
turn-off. We ran into a cheery British couple who gave up walking and
led us back and onto various side trails before a close look at the
map indicated the turn-off was further up. "Right," and they were
off again. We hiked through forest reminiscent of the Pacific
Northwest: all views were obscured by trees! About halfway up we were
passed by about 40 or 50 people intent on the via ferrata route. We
guessed that they had all come on a bus and gotten off together. A few
extra confident types seemed to be guides, and most conversation was
in German. It took us a while to reach a high pass, due to the heat,
and finally I went ahead a bit and scrambled up the approach to the
via ferrata. When I saw how far it was still, I turned back and met
Kris. We were happy to eat a lunch of bread, cheese, speck, and
cookies, while looking across at some beautiful mountains. This had
been a good hike, but without the energy to do the via ferrata, we
decided to head back to the car and do something else with the late
afternoon. On the way down we took a most excellent nap in a patch of
green grass! Again, the trails were empty.  We never saw "day
hikers" trickling in on the trail in the afternoon the way you might
here (in Washington). Instead, the arrival time of hikers seems tied
to the first lift or the first bus. Everyone goes in a big clump
together. So you can find solitude if you go against this pattern. I
would later come back to this climb and defy the pattern so
effectively, I didn't see anyone on the entire climb.


We drove to Falzarego Pass and admired our climb from the day
before. We then took a lift up to the Rifugio Lagazoui. This lift
carried us up 3000 feet in 4 minutes, and the cables were so far away
from the steep mountainside that it felt like we were in a plane. At
the top, we got a Coke and took pictures on the sun deck, admiring the
views of Marmalota and other peaks. Tofana di Rozes looked
magnificent, and I shivered at the idea that Steve and I would climb
it. The upper snowfields looked steep, and provoked apprehension.
Kris and I walked along the cliff to a plateau, and I continued to a
higher plateau with a cross. Like many others in this area, the cross
was dedicated to the memory of those who fell in WWI. I had to run
back as fast as I could to make the final lift down. Kris was
apprehensive because the lift was PACKED with people, and she wondered
if this exceeded some weight limit. Imagine 30 non-English speaking
people crowded in a gondola and the lift operator telling us to get
in.  I thought about how I wish I didn't eat all those pizzas!  When
you get on, the car isn't still, it kind of sways back and forth.  On
the way down you think of the best way for the car to fall - on it's
side so that all the people will cushion you and it will be ok.  Then
you think about it falling the other way and...oh, the horror!  There
is a wave of relief from everyone when we get close to the ground
station.


We admired a collection of old cars at the pass. Then Kris tried on a
Tyrolean hat and looked great. Kris bought some postcards and I bought
a book in English (the only one). I tried to read stories in German
about the Great War and all the tunnels they dug in the
mountains. Incidentally, there was a series of man-made caves near Col
Rosa, no doubt used as ammunition dumps in those insane years.


We then drove around looking for a castle that I spotted a few days
ago.  We didn't really how to get to it exactly (I only had a vague
idea where it was) so with only a few wrong turns, we managed to find
it.  It was a really cool castle, built around the year 1000.  It
wasn't an "attraction" at all, just something really neat to look
at.  It was a bummer we couldn't go in since they were remodeling.  It
probably would have been a hazard anyways since it was quite crumbly.


We ate dinner at the Hotel Cortina (AGAIN!) and got to know Marco (the
waiter) a little better.  He told us about his pets and how much he
misses them since his house is near the Swiss border and he lives in
the hotel when he's in Cortina.  We asked if it was a dog or cat and
he said "No, they're Japanese chickens!"  We burst out laughing
because that was so unexpected.  We had a wonderful meal and then went
back to our hotel room and spent the evening looking at our slides and
choosing our favorites.


![View from the gondola](images/articles/trips/2001/viewfromgondola.jpg)
![Michael bouldering on some nearby rock](images/articles/trips/2001/michaelbouldering.jpg) 

![Old cars at the pass](images/articles/trips/2001/oldcars.jpg) 

![Kris trying on some hats](images/articles/trips/2001/krishat.jpg)

![Another view of the castle](images/articles/trips/2001/rockcastle2.jpg)


07.01.01: We go to Innsbruck, Austria for a little culture and to do laundry! (by Kris)
----------

We ran a few errands this morning (went to the co-op for some food,
checked out of our hotel, etc.) then went on a drive to Innsbruck.  It
took us about 3 hours from Cortina.  Since there was a lot of
construction on the autostrada, we didn't make as good of a time as we
thought we would.  It was a nice drive though, lots of pretty green
hillsides with a few houses sprinkles here and there.


This was the first time that we had taken the autostrada and we didn't
know what to do when we arrived at a toll booth.  We just went into
some lane and there was no person there.  No instructions were in
English so we didn't know what we were supposed to do.  Michael pushed
the only button that was there (hopefully to call someone?) and a
ticket printed and the gate lifted up.  Ok, that was weird, we didn't
have to pay anything.  We eventually figured out that the ticket just
"marks" where you enter the autostrada then you pay at the next toll
booth.  We encountered a slight unexpected culture shock entering
Austria, as everything abruptly switches from Italian to German.
Although Michael can read some German, seeing EVERYTHING in German was
kind of weird.  We learned the Italian way and got used to it, so
switching took a few hours to get adjusted.


We arrived in downtown Innsbruck at around noon and immediately found
our way to the tourist information office and found a place to stay
for the night.  This is the first time we did this and it was so easy
to find a reasonable place to stay.  It was a really picturesque
building right near the center of town and it wasn't too expensive.
Close by was a good Chinese restaurant and a movie theater (I'll talk
about these later).



![Michael frustrated in Innsbruck](images/articles/trips/2001/michaelinnsbruck.jpg)

We drove to the hotel and the woman assured us that parking on the
street would be no problem.  But she forgot to mention there was some
kind of parade(?) going on so they blocked off some of the roads and
we found no parking on the street at all.  We decided to park in a lot
nearby so we don't waste our time looking for parking.


The first thing on our agenda was LAUNDRY!  You have no idea what
Michael's socks smell like after they have been worn at least 3 days
in a row.  We found a place called "Bubble Point Waschsalon" and it
was a very high tech laundramat.  Everything was controlled by a
central kiosk and they even gave us free laundry detergent!  We had
some problems with the darn bill acceptor - you cannot have any
wrinkles whatsoever in your bills, or it spits it right back out.  We
were hoping to use the two Internet computers there but people were
already on it.  Apparently, they have found a way to use it for free.
I tried to look over the guys shoulder to see how he did it, but he
was protective of his secret.  He put money in the kiosk that controls
Internet access and then somehow got it to return his money and give
him access time.


We walked around for a bit and realized that it was Sunday and
everything was pretty much closed.  So we went back to the tourist
office to ask if there is another Internet point.  There was one place
really close by, so we went there while we waited for our laundry.
They also had phones you could use to call long distance for really
cheap so we called our friend from Germany, Mattias, and made plans to
meet in Cortina Tuesday evening.  He was supposed to come Monday
evening but he was playing American style football and injured his
foot.


We passed by a McDonald's and bought some fries, and we were amazed at
how good they were.  Even though it was junk food, it was kind of nice
to have something familiar.  We went back to the car to drop off our
laundry and realized that we should make plans for the week so that we
can get as much in as we can.  This involved calling Refugio's in
Italy, calling Mattias several more times, but we finally got our plan
straight.  Now that we had our laundry done, we could do some sight
seeing.


![Innsbruck from the clock tower](images/articles/trips/2001/innsbruckfromtower.jpg)

We entered what people call the "old" part of town and ate lunch.  I
had a typical German dish of dumplings and cheese (that Michael really
liked) and Michael had sausage and sauerkraut.  It was refreshing to
eat something other than Italian food!  We then went to the 
Golden Roof and learned about how powerful Emperor Maximilian I was
and that he was an avid climber!


We also climbed the 148 steps to the top of the clock tower for a
great view of the city.  The weather wasn't very good that day, mostly
cloudy, but there were a few "god beams" breaking through the clouds
that gave the city a very holy appearance.


We went back to our hotel room to rest a little while and Michael
watched a really strange-yet-addicting game show.  It was in German so
we didn't really know everything that was happening.  But what Michael
did understand was there was a bunch of people that lived together for
awhile and the goal is to see who loses the most amount of weight.
After living together for a certain period of time, they come into the
studio and tell their stories and weigh in.  This guy, who still
looked like he could lose a few, was cheering because he lost 3
pounds.  It was weird, but so weird that you couldn't stop watching
it.

We then went out to dinner at the Waldorf Chinese restaurant, which
was right behind the hotel that we were staying in.  It was a surreal
environment, it looks kind of closed (almost boarded up) from the
outside and on the inside is a "wall" that goes up about 3/4 to the
ceiling with another door that you have to go through - at this point
we weren't sure if we're supposed to just go in or wait for someone to
come out and greet us.  We went inside anyway and was greeted by a
really nice Chinese woman.  The inside structure was kind of strange,
like it was a building from the middle ages decorated in 1975 Chinese
stuff.  Strange.  Anyways, the woman really liked me, I'm assuming
because I'm asian and they don't see many asians in Innsbruck.  We
found out that she moved to Austria because she went on a holiday to
Innsbruck, really liked the town, moved and opened up the restaurant.
It's been there for the last 20 years!  The food was excellent and
Michael said it was the best Chinese meal he has ever had!  WOW!


I really wanted to see a blockbuster American movie in a foreign
language, so we went to see "Die Mummy Kehrt Zuruck" at the theater
that was literally 15 steps away from our hotel.  We enjoyed it
thoroughly - as the theater seats were the big, cushy, rock-back kind
and even though we didn't understand what was going on word-for-word,
we knew the general plot (how hard is that???).  Every few minutes,
Michael would lean over and whisper "That guy is just a friend who is
helping them out" or other tidbits he could understand.  Seeing a bad
American movie in a foreign language adds a lot to the excitement!  So
now we're looking forward to the English version to see what we didn't
catch.  If you're ever in a non-English speaking country, I highly
recommend doing this!



We got up fairly early and had breakfast.  We talked to a family from
Louisiana and they had been in Europe for the past 5 months!  The
father was on sabbatical from the University.  I was very interested
to know how traveling for so long with two kids (5 and 7) was.  He
explained the good and the bad and how they had to adjust to the
different way of life for awhile.  They looked like they were having
quite the experience!


The first thing on my agenda after checking out was to call my mother
in Hawaii since I haven't talked to her in over a week.  They are 11
hours behind, so I tried to call them around 10am.  I went to the pay
phone near the parking garage and realized that I didn't know the
country code for the US.  Was it the same as calling from Italy?  I
looked everywhere in the phone booth and no country code for the US
could be found.  Luckily, there was a phone book in the booth so I
could look it up.  ARRRGH!  The front pages that might have all that
kind of information were missing!  So, I stopped a guy on the street
and he didn't know.  He came back 30 seconds later and said "the
front pages of the phone book should have the information!"  Thanks a
lot, mister!  We tried to use the phone card to call information but
it doesn't connect.  I had one 5 shilling coin (about 30 cents) and
called information using that.  Just as the operator was going to give
me the country code, the phone got cut off since my time was up.
Great.


We drove to the Alpenzoo very frustrated!  We couldn't believe how
hard it was to get just the darn country code for the US.  We parked
in the lot of the zoo and asked someone else if they knew it and sure
enough, it was the same as Italy (at least we think so), 001.  So, I
went to the phone in the zoo parking lot, excited to finally be
calling my mom, and I find out that you cannot use a phone card with
that phone (it wasn't touch tone?).  At that point, I gave up.
There's no use in ruining the whole day trying to call Hawaii and it
was getting late anyway.


The first animals that we saw at the zoo were two grizzly bears.  It
was amazing how close up they were.  They were down in a pit and we
were directly above them, about 10 feet away.  I'm so used to seeing
bears 50 feet away with a moat separating the people from the animals.
I was amazed that having them closer to you made you almost connect
with them.  I didn't make a connection in my mind that since it was an
zoo with Alpine animals, that the whole zoo would be on the side of a
hill.  We spent the first half going uphill (ugh!) watching the Ibex
scratch their backs with their horns, the red deer sleeping in the
shade, the large birds eying you as if you're their next meal, a
small water snake forcing his food down by swimming like a tornado,
and a sleeping river otter.  They even had a petting zoo where we
connected with some goats and watched a piglets wrestle each other as
they're mother lay down to feed them.  We did make fun of the pig
because people always say "pigs are very smart, smarter than dogs and
cats."  We watched the mother pig get up and trot over to her pool.
She got in and drank some water then starting urinating in it!  We
were grossing out and wondering who in their right minds would think
that this animal was smarter than our cats!  Geez!  The only
disappointment of the zoo was that all the marmots were hiding!


We headed back to Italy and headed straight to the Rifugio Fonda
Savio.  It's about a 1 hour hike in and well worth it!  The rifugio
sits in a saddle between spectacular towers and since there was some
snow still around, it made it even more scenic!  We were running a
little late so I had Michael run ahead to make sure that we can still
get dinner.  It turns out that we were supposed to be there by 6pm (no
one mentioned that whenever we made our reservation) and since we
arrived at 6:15pm, they gave our beds to someone else!  The woman was
kind of rude at first but then said that they had extra beds for
emergencies.


![Rifugio Fonda Savio](images/articles/trips/2001/rifugiofondasavio.jpg)
![Sunset at the rifugio](images/articles/trips/2001/fshutatsunset.jpg)

She then took us to our beds, which were in the attic.  You have to
climb a 12 foot ladder to get up, which was scary at first, and up
there was about 30 cots.  Ours were in the "overflow" room - 5 cots
with 2 tanks of something.  Michael thought it would be funny if it
was a septic tank.  I think it was hot water tanks.  We shared the
room with a guy from California who didn't talk very much.  The
bathroom is downstairs and everyone shares one bathroom (no shower)!
So you have to plan accordingly because going up and down the ladder
is not efficient.


We sat down for dinner and sat next to these kind of snooty German or
Austrian climbers.  The dinner was pretty decent, even better than
some restaurants in Cortina.  The owner (a woman in her mid-thirties)
sat next to us and we enjoyed talking to her.  She gave us good beta
on some routes that we were planning to do the next day.  We wanted to
to "Il Gobbo" but found out that the approach is still covered in
snow.  So, Torre Wundt was going to be our climb for tomorrow.
Everyone kind of looked at us and didn't think we could climb or
something because when we said that we were going to climb it, they
would always say something like "do you have the equipment?" or
"have you climbed before?"  We'll show them!



![Michael playing in the sunset](images/articles/trips/2001/fssunset.jpg)
![Our sleeping arrangements](images/articles/trips/2001/fondasaviobunk.jpg)

It was hard for us to mix with the people there since no one really
spoke English and everyone knew each other.  We found out that almost
all of them were part of a climbing course from the University of
Innsbruck.  We felt so out of place and no one showed interest in
talking to us so we went to our room and organized our stuff.  Then I
went to sleep and Michael stayed up awhile reading.


Michael finally went to bed but a horrible, foul noise woke him up.
He said a old man sleeping next to me was farting really loudly then
chuckling/coughing repeatedly.  He had no control.  The room filled
with toxic levels of methane.  There were some really long, moist
intestinal activity going on right next to me!  Thank god I was
asleep!  Michael was horrified but eventually managed to fall asleep
between chuckles.


07.03.01: We do Torre Wundt (by Michael)
---------


![Torre Wundt and the rifugio](images/articles/trips/2001/torrewundts.jpg)
![Kris high above the rifugio](images/articles/trips/2001/kristw.jpg)
![Michael resting on a belay ledge](images/articles/trips/2001/michaeltw.jpg)

![Michael trying to figure out the descent](images/articles/trips/2001/michaelconfusedtw.jpg)

* Climb: Torre Wundt, South Face, 7 pitches, 5.5

After breakfast we went outside to get a look at the route.  I had
gone to check out the base the evening before, and had a pretty good
idea of the start. There was some steep scree to hike up, and I knew
Kris would love that! The hut owner said the climb gets sun only after
11 am, due to high walls on the other side of the narrow valley. We
sat outside for an hour, but finally at 10 am, we got tired of waiting
and started up. We were gearing up at the base when a large guided
group (about 7 people) arrived. I made sure to look very ready when
they arrived!



Kris belayed me on the first pitch, a cold chimney, but with solid,
water-worn rock. Kris enjoyed this. A shorter, easier pitch led us to
the crux of the route - a 50 meter pitch on an imposing black wall. I
could hug the left edge which offered chances to place protection, but
the climbing was harder.  The center wall was easier but
unprotected. I veered between the two choices, really paying attention
until I reached a belay station. Kris was talking with the guide
below, and came up the pitch very nicely. Next a series of chimneys,
starting with a difficult crack move led me to a huge belay bolt at
the entrance to a cave. From here, we climbed out of the cave on the
left. I escaped by climbing a crack, and combined two short pitches to
reach a rock horn with incredible views down to the hut. Placing a
sling over the horn, I brought Kris up to here.  We were now in the
warm sun, and enjoying ourselves greatly.  One or two rope lengths of
very easy climbing brought us to the summit. We signed the register,
some of the only English language signatures there! After a few
photos, we started down on what proved to be a complex and
time-consuming descent.



We made five rappels with our single rope, each of which traversed
slightly. Then I lowered Kris a rope length to a high pass between
towers. We simul-climbed on a traverse around the mountain across
several gullies. I was able to place gear at difficult sections to
protect Kris. Finally we reached another pass and looked down to the
trail we had come up the day before, but there was a big problem. The
colouir was filled with snow, and it became very steep! We both wore
rock shoes, and Kris has never been comfortable climbing on snow. She
was very worried, and we thought about our options as the guided group
that followed us up came along.  We decided to wait and let them go
first.



Their guide confidently stepped down the slope in good boots. He
reached a rock horn with rappel slings, and encouraged his party to
follow. Watching them teeter down uncertainly just made Kris worry
more about our fate! From here, the guide lowered a woman a full rope
length to the end of the snow, then everyone else rappelled,
presumably past the worst difficulties. Now I was confident that we
could safely descend. I lowered Kris to the rappel station, then
climbed down myself. After lowering her to the end of the snow, I
rappelled, then downclimbed. I was happy to have the nice steps
created by those with boots. Still, it was slippery in my traction-less
shoes, and by the time I got off the snow, I was yelping due to
near-frozen hands and feet. It felt so good to get my nice warm socks
and boots on! After hiking back up to the hut to retrieve gear, we
continued down, glancing back at the magical realm of Torre Wundt.



Notes from Kris:


We went straight to Marco and ordered big portions of pasta.  He
showed us his web page with pictures of his pets (the Japanese
chickens) and we showed him our page.


We called Mattias, and he was still at home.  We didn't know why he
hadn't left!


Also, Jeff came into the restaurant for a few minutes, said he was in
town and was looking for Mattias.


![A sturdy friend on the summit](images/articles/trips/2001/ravenonsum.jpg)
![Michael on the summit of Torre Wundt](images/articles/trips/2001/torrewundtsummit.jpg) 
![Michael upset with his lunch](images/articles/trips/2001/rottenapple.jpg)

![Kris descending the steep snow gully in tennis shoes](images/articles/trips/2001/twsnowdescent.jpg) 

![An interesting topo tile (large)](images/articles/trips/2001/twtopo.jpg)

07.04.01: A complete rest day (by Kris)
----------

Sorry to disappoint you folks, but we didn't to much today.  We had a
full day with Torre Wundt, so we basically just napped and hung around
Cortina.  We went to the Internet place for awhile and sent out some
mail and I got more slides and pictures developed, but that's about
it.  I think this was the most down time we had on the whole trip.
Nothing exciting...just resting and relaxing.



07.05.01: Long, long day! (by Kris and Michael)

Michael woke up at 4:30am and had to climb out of the drawing room
window to get out of the hotel.  He drove to the Olympia Campground
and climbed the Bovero via ferrata (Col Rosa).  This was very quick
and he was back by 9:30am.  He saw a heard of Ibex.



Report on Col Rosa: (by Michael)

Since Kris and I had made the forested hike up to the start of this
route a few days before, I was really keen on finishing it. The crux
of the climb was escaping from the hotel. Every door was locked, so I
started searching for a window. I found a drawing room one floor above
the parking lot and a series of pipes and ivy I could climb down. It
was pretty scary lowering myself out the window, especially since if I
made a mistake and fell, the embarrassment would kill me. I could just
see the lights turning on and the nice little old lady screaming about
a burglar! Heart racing, I jumped into the car and took off for the
campground that marks the start of the route. I zoomed up the trail in
damp, misty forest, and shortly after turning onto the steep, rough
climbers trail I found myself emerging above the dense clouds. What
joy! I half expected to be "socked-in" for the entire trip. I took
some pictures and put on my harness and helmet.  Soon, I came to the
route, and began fumbling with the short lengths of rope and
carabiners that made up my safety equipment.



Soon, the route became steep, and fairly challenging if you avoid
touching the metal rungs as I did. Metal pegs would stop your fall in
case of an accident, but the pegs were sometimes 20 feet apart, thus
offering little comfort. But despite occasional worries, I moved
quickly, and seemingly insurmountable cliffs and buttresses piled up
below me. I remember one fantastic exposed traverse to the left around
a blind corner. The village was still wreathed in clouds below, and
the sun was beginning to peak around high Sorapis. I reached a
subpeak, and hiking terrain. An ibex jumped away from me. Some more
cables led me to the summit, which hosted a beautiful iron cross. This
had been an excellent introduction to via ferrata, and I wished
Kris had been with me. On our previous attempt we started in the heat
of the day (11 am), and were quickly passed by over 50 people led by a
guide. By going early I had cool conditions, and didn't see anyone
until reaching the car.



![Sunrise and blue sky!](images/articles/trips/2001/sunrisecr.jpg) 
![Steep protected route](images/articles/trips/2001/ldowncr.jpg) 
![A picture of Kris in her hotel room](images/articles/trips/2001/valcortina.jpg)

On the hike down I startled a herd of ibex. I took some pictures, but
without a zoom lens they were too far away. The trail was good,
although very steep and exposed on sandy ledges at one point. Soon, I
was driving home for some breakfast!



Back to Kris...

Mattias and Georg knocked on the door at 7:30am.  Apparently, they
were at the hotel at 6:15am but didn't want to wake me.  They also had
to convince the lady downstairs to let him come up and knock on my
door.  They have a policy not to let anyone who is not a guest
upstairs.


Since they don't allow non-guests in the room, we had to wait for
Michael in the lobby.  We visited for a little while then they had to
run some errands.


Kris ate breakfast and Michael came back from Col Rosa.  We quickly
packed up and checked out, Mat and Georg in tow.

We drove to Cinque Torri and hiked up to Torre Inglese.  To avoid
snow, Kris had to take a long way around that I thought would be
easier, but dang, it was harder! She arrived and we climbed the
*via Normale* route behind Mattias and Georg.  Kris found hard moves on
the very polished first pitch.  I climbed a variation to the right out
of the chimney for more fun and to get around Mattias and Georg.  The
upper pitch was fun.  2 rappels.



![Kris climbing...](images/articles/trips/2001/krisoning.jpg) 
![...on Torre Inglese](images/articles/trips/2001/krisoning2.jpg) 
![A hanging belay](images/articles/trips/2001/meoning.jpg)

Kris was happy there was no walk off. [that may seem a strange
comment, but in Kris's experience, walking down from a climb usually
entails scrambling in steep, dirty gullies that can be scarier than
the climb itself. Consequently, she's come to prefer rappels!]
Michael, Georg and Mattias climbed a fun sport route - (5.9/10a, we
think it was *Tinsemal* on Torre Quarta Alta).

Then they climbed Torre del Barancio (the route was Via Ignazio
Dibona) and said that it would only take and hour so I should come,
but I (Kris) was smart and took a small nap on the rocks below
instead.  They ended up taking 2.5 hours and Georg waved to me on
almost every belay.


Mattias and I took turns leading.  I started first. The climb was
steep right off the ground, and very exciting. With two ropes I was
able to belay Georg and Mat up at the same time.  I think he got the
crux pitch with a steep crack, then I climbed a long easy pitch that
angled off halfway up.  The ropes got tangled pretty bad on the last
pitch because Mat wouldn't slow down and give us a chance to untangle
them!


We descended with two steep single rope rappels.  I bruised my arm and
cut my leg on an overhang, caused by the very jerky belay device.  I
ended up carrying both ropes and the rack back to Kris, demanding
payment in beer!


We drove to town and looked for signs of Jeff.  We bought dinner for
Mattias and Georg at the Hotel Cortina.  Eventually Jeff came in and
told us that he had waited all day at the Cinque Torri for us.  I
guess we just missed him? Anyway, Marco gave us extra food for free,
so Jeff got a meal, and we said goodbye to Marco, who had been such a
friend in cooking excellent meals for us!


![On Torre Barancio](images/articles/trips/2001/baranciop1.jpg) 

![Georg, Mat and Michael](images/articles/trips/2001/threeamigos.jpg) 
![Tinsemal, 5.10a](images/articles/trips/2001/meonsport.jpg) 
![Georg on pitch 2](images/articles/trips/2001/georgclimb.jpg)
![Silly germans!](images/articles/trips/2001/matngrg.jpg)


We wished them well on their way (they were doing more climbing) and
we headed to Bolzano.  It was a mistake to drive in the dark, since it
was very stressful and we were tired.  We even stopped for 30 minutes
to rest our eyes.  The gas credit card machine ate our credit card
when we put it in upside down. We called the credit card company who
said they know about these machines at the gas stations, and that our
card was "certainly destroyed."


We arrived at the Hotel Citta at 2:00am.  We had to drive through town
and passed a lot of ladies of the night (a really strange scene).  We
checked into our room and went to sleep, really cranky and tired!


07.06.01: We find the best Hotel in the world! (by Kris)
------

Woke up in the morning to find water dripping in the room.  Kris
thought it was in the bathroom but on the way to check, she stepped in
the puddle of water from the air conditioning vents.  The lights also
stopped working so Michael had to take a shower in the dark.  Kris
went to the tourist office to find another hotel since this one was so
bad.  She found one and we checked out.  We told the people at the
front desk about the problems and instead of giving us a discount or
something, they said we should think of it as romantic that the lights
weren't working.  Yeah, right lady.  We nicknamed this hotel the
"Hotel Shitta," it was so terrible, we will never go back. [
part of the reason for this hostility was that this hotel was far more
expensive than any other hotel of our entire stay. We also only spent
a few hours there, since we came in so late - Michael]


We chose the Gasthof Kohlern, which was up a hill and overlooked
Bolzano.  You can drive up a one lane windy road or you can take the
gondola up and down.  We drove up and it was only 170,000 lire ($74)
for their best room.  It was beautiful, just what we needed to wind
down and relax from the night before.  Lunch was incredible.  The
fresh risotto was delicious!


After lunch and a nap, we took the gondola down to Bolzano and was
surprised that we were the only ones in it!  We had a great view as we
approached the city from above.  We ran some errands - we went to Avis
and found out we can return our car to Verona and then we went to the
Archaeological museum where the 5300 year old man - Oetzi - is kept.
We were amazed at how short he was (5 feet and 4 inches) and enjoyed
the multimedia presentations they had about finding him and about all
the discoveries they made since they found him.


We met up with our friends from Portland, Steve and Sarah, just to say hello,
and they were naturally really tired. We decided when and where to meet the next
morning.  We had to get back before the last gondola up the mountain left, and
it was about a 1 miles walk.  We made it just in time, as the conductor was
standing outside apparently looking for us (he smiled broadly when we arrived).
Whew!


Dinner was delicious and we met Axel and Natalie, a German couple on
their honeymoon. Natalie had lived in Texas for a few years.  We
shared some wine and made some new friends - something so easy to do
in Italy!


07.07.01: Michael and Steve head to Cortina, Kris and Sarah stay in Bolzano (by Michael and Kris)
---------

Notes from Kris:


Woke up, had breakfast.  Drove to town to meet Steve and Sarah. We
went to their room and showed them some slides. After they checked
out, we showed them where to buy and use phone cards (this gave us a
lot of trouble!). Sarah totally didn't believe you just have to dial
001 and the number to call the U.S. Michael called his mom just to
prove that this is all you do, totally forgetting that it was 2 am in
Washington! To her credit, she never let on that it was so late,
instead, she chatted pleasantly until he hung up. Oh brother!



Steve and Michael took our car, and Sarah and I decided to explore
Bolzano.  We walked around a bit but quickly found out everything was
closed for the afternoon. We found some shops to come back to on
Monday. We ate lunch at a so-so cafe, then I went back to the Gasthof
Kohlern, and Sarah went to her hotel. Sarah and I had a great dinner
at the Gasthof, and took some sunset pictures. I stayed in a smaller
room, since Michael was gone, but I wished he was there with me!


Notes from Michael:

![The Cinque Torre from Monte Averau](images/articles/trips/2001/ctorre.jpg)


Steve and I drove quickly to Cortina, eager to get some climbing in
and check the weather forecast. I forgot all the shops would be closed
on a Sunday afternoon, so we headed for the Cinque Torre, and climbed
Torre Inglese to introduce Steve to the rock. A few drops of rain fell
from threatening clouds, so we climbed and rappelled quickly. Steve
liked the rock, as I had promised! We looked across at the massive
wall of Tofana di Rozes that we proposed to climb, and realized that
with a grim weather forecast we shouldn't go up there. We went back to
town and bought lightweight ice axes, planning to do a via ferrata on
Tofana that was still "closed" due to snow. Jeff had told us two
Swiss guys had climbed it days before, so we decided to give it a
try. We drove to the Rifugio Dibona, on a flank of the mountain, and
had a rather unsatisfactory stay. We shared a crowded room with 5
(very nice) Italians and endured a greasy dinner. This cost 50 dollars
a person, not to mention the fact that they had no potable water.  We
had to purchase water for the next days climb. We went for a brisk
hike to look at the routes on the south face of Tofana. With a light
rain falling and waterfalls pouring down fissures in the face, it
didn't look very enticing for technical climbing the next day.


07.08.01: Michael and Steve do a via ferrata, Kris and Sarah head to Castelrotto (by Michael and Kris)
------


![Michael on via ferrata Lipella](images/articles/trips/2001/tdrupme.jpg)


Continued notes from Michael about Tofana di Rozes:


Thunder, lightning and heavy rain kept us up much of the night. We
decided to get up at 5 am and go outside no matter what. Typical of
Europeans, our bunk-mates thought getting up early meant 7 am! We got
lucky, because we stepped outside to a vista of stars, fading in a
clear sky.


We hiked quickly to the base of the via ferrata Lipella. First we
scoped the start of the Via Commune (an excellent climbing route) for
a future attempt.  Lipella begins with an 800 meter long war tunnel,
complete with side chambers and rusting metal. The end of the tunnel
had scrambling over wet slabs. We spent about 30 minutes continuing
too high in the tunnel, then out onto the face for a thrilling, but
unnecessary iron path. We descended back into the tunnel and took an
earlier exit that led to hiking on a broad shoulder. We had to cross a
steep, frozen snow slope that would have been impassable without the
axes we purchased. Even with them, it was difficult!  Then we climbed
a series of protected rock steps separated by scenic long traverses on
exposed ledges. This route seemed intent on providing a full tour of
the mountain, crossing an entire face, then doubling back higher
up. For one section, we switched to rock shoes, but in general, it
wasn't necessary to bring them, it just allowed us to choose harder
climbing variations slightly away from the iron cables.



Sadly, we don't have many pictures, since there was confusion about
one roll had 24 or 36 exposures. It was 24, so we had to conserve
pictures greatly. We came to a junction with a via ferrata that came
from the other side of the mountain. Meeting a group of Italians here,
we continued together on the route. We reached a steep and exposed 900
foot high rock step. It was festooned with people! They had beat us by
taking the shorter way from the other side of the mountain. We fell
into line behind them and enjoyed the scenery. The Italians with us
had no protective gear, and were apprehensive about continuing. As
Steve and I climbed, he got a pounding headache. We were reaching an
altitude of 10,000 feet, too high for a fellow just off the plane!



![Bottleneck on the route](images/articles/trips/2001/tdrline.jpg)


Near the end of the rock, a member of the guided party ahead took a
short fall. This prompted them to get out a rope and begin knocking
rocks off on us. After a few near misses, I was eager to somehow get
around them!  I unhooked from the iron rope, and investigated ways to
pass on the right.  The terrain was exposed class 3, fairly loose, but
with ledges. Before I could go far, their guide offered to let Steve
and I pass. For some reason, we didn't think this would be
forthcoming, but they were very nice, and I'm sorry I didn't just ask
earlier. Moving ahead, we came to a high shoulder, and the end of the
iron way. Snow slopes led several hundred feet to the summit. A mass
of about 15 people was piled up on the shoulder, evidently waiting for
someone to kick steps to the summit!  Obligingly, Steve and I started
up. He was pretty unhappy due to the headache, and general feeling of
nausea. Again, the ice axes came in handy as we climbed the steepening
snow, and after a long interval, we were walking to the iron cross,
seemingly present on every mountain of importance here! Steve took a
picture of me climbing on the cross, that is something I probably
shouldn't have done. I felt a little embarrassed, I hope I didn't
defile a sacred object!



As we started down, we met a very happy man, thanking us for making
steps, and a little emotional about the joy of reaching the
summit. His attitude was infectious, and we parted very warmly despite
being total strangers. I stomped down the snow and waited for Steve at
the shoulder.  I was surprised at how long he was taking, since
usually he is a whiz on snow, down at the ground while I'm still
scrabbling and cursing.  His hiking boots made poorer purchase than my
own, and the altitude was having an affect on him. Eager to lose
altitude, I started down the standard way, which consisted of shelves
of crumbly rock mixed with snow slopes. Keeping Steve in sight was a
challenge, as he came very slowly and rested often on easy
terrain. Only then did I see how powerfully the altitude had hit
him. I kept closer and began thinking of what we might do should we
need help. As I waited, I convinced a Czech couple without gloves or
ice axes to turn around.  They were slipping on icy slopes, hands red
and raw from touching the snow.



We made some standing glissades, sliding joyfully down the slopes.
Steve improved markedly - he had been having trouble breathing. At the
hut, we ate Apfel Struedel and drank orange soda. The walls of the hut
were plastered with articles and pictures of climbing on Tofana di
Rozes.  What a cool place! We quickly hiked down to Rifugio Dibona and
our car.



We found a room at a cheap but very nice Gasthaus. I took a shower
with only shaving cream to function as soap and shampoo! Later the
shops opened at we ate at the Pizzeria Cinque Torri and went to
bed. We checked the town bulletin board for a message from Mat, but
they had left.



![The Visigoth Defiler!](images/articles/trips/2001/tdrsummit.jpg)


07.09.01: Michael and Steve climb, Kris and Sarah go shopping (by Michael and Kris)
------


![Monte Averau's Southwest face](images/articles/trips/2001/averau1.jpg)


Steve and I had decided on a climb of Monte Averau, via the Southwest
Face, first climbed in 1945. The grade was about 5.6, and there were 7
pitches.  We had some hope of climbing this, then going over for the
Hexenstein in the afternoon. Waking at 5, we drove to Passu Giau. As
we left the car, Steve locked the keys in the trunk! Oh boy. Rather
than worry about this problem, we decided to climb and enjoy
ourselves, and later figure out a solution!



The guidebook had some great text for this route, really going into
overdrive to sell it: *It is not particularly big. It is not
particularly impressive.  But the Averau, perched on a rise between
the Falzarego Pass and Passo Giau, will tempt you onto its sunny
Southwest face with an utterly worthwhile route where the grade IV
climber is king for the day!...A small route, but perfectly formed --
and guaranteed to hold your attention!* Naturally, we were excited. It
took a bit over an hour to hike to the base of the route, and we roped
up for some 4th class climbing in the loose approach gully.  This
route did turn out to be really fun, but I must say it is the most
indistinct route of the trip. The guidebook describes the start this
way: Start on the rubble-strewn ledge at a chimney, just left of
an ill-defined arete. The words "ill-defined" and "vague" occur
repeatedly in the route topo! Anyway, we believe we identified the
start, mainly because of an old piton. Steve took the first lead, with
a difficult bouldering start.  The rock was still very cold. From his
constructed belay, I continued up a chimney to a saddle, then climbed
right up a series of face and chimney moves. I reached a bolt station
on a long ledge that traversed the face, completely unsure of my
location in regards to the topo.




Steve carefully walked 40 meters to the left on this ledge,
identifying the start of pitch 3. After following the traverse, I
belayed Steve up a hard pitch into the "yellow groove." He brought
me up from a piton belay. The next pitch was pretty interesting, as it
was a 50 foot traverse to the right with some challenging climbing. I
found good protection early on, then a long silent stretch where I
tried not to pay too much attention to the ground far below! Finally,
I escaped into a cave with belay bolts. This cave contained a route
register, which we signed before moving on. The next pitch climbed
straight up on vertical rock.  My foot slipped on a greasy hold, but
everything else stayed attached!  Then easier wandering left then
right led to a sling belay. There was little protection on this
difficult pitch.


![The "terrible traverse"](images/articles/trips/2001/climba3.jpg) 

![High on the route](images/articles/trips/2001/climba2.jpg) 

![Final pitch to the summit](images/articles/trips/2001/mefollav.jpg)

Pitch 6 turned out to be the crux of the route. It started up a loose,
shattered chimney, protected by tiny nuts. It went left then right
again, where I clipped a fixed sling before a very committing
overhang.  There were a few moves of 5.8 to climb the overhang, and I
gratefully clipped a piton above this section. My pack tried to pull
me off the next overhang! But I reached a bolt belay after a short
rightward traverse.  We really couldn't make sense of this pitch in
regard to the topo, but it must have been the route since the entire
face overhangs in this area. It was pretty ingenious how the first
ascentionists found this twisting way through very forbidding terrain!
Steve was glad I had that lead, and he took us to the summit on an
easy but loose traverse.



We took some pictures and hiked down, eventually coming to a short but
fun via ferrata. We just used climbing slings to attach to the iron,
knowing full well that a real fall would break them. Consequently, we
climbed down very conservatively, always ready to hang on the sling
rather than risk a fall. We met a couple who had climbed the Punta
Anna via ferrata the day before. It's too bad we didn't have time to
do that one, as it is quite long and hard. Once down, we hiked back to
Passu Giau, and Steve paid a mechanic 25 dollars to come up from town
and open the car. What a great price! It was fairly late, so we
started our drive back to Bolzano. We took a new route down and up to
magnificent Pordoi Pass. Here we got out and hiked a while.  Then on
to Sella Pass and Val Gardena. Steve was getting his first chance to
drive on Italian mountain roads, and took to it well.  Before dark we
triumphantly arrived at the Gasthof Kollern, meeting Kris and Sarah
for dinner. We each had plenty to say about our day!



