---
title: Middle Cathedral Rock+East Buttress
date: 1999-06-20
layout: post
location: Yosemite
---

* The East Buttress (5.9, A0)
* June 20-21, 1999

Tom Cormons and I got an early start on the route, we never saw anyone
else all day.  Tom and I met two days before on the Nutcracker. He is
a great guy, and very strong climber.  This climb was beyond my
ability to lead, so I was happy to second all the pitches but the
first (I think a token 5.6 or 5.7!).


I'm writing this 5 years late, so details are sketchy!


Okay, so we are climbing, just loving the views. We come to "Ant Tree
Ledge," and I kid ye knot, while I am belaying Tom on the next pitch,
ten thousand marching ants emerge from the tree in a frenzy, somehow
smelling our presence. They march along the rope to me where I try to
flick them off and still provide a decent belay. Meanwhile, Tom is in
the soup because the tricky hand crack above the tree is suddenly
suffused with ants! He is trying to climb and place protection gear,
with the ants spindling up his arms and going down his back. He is
blowing and whimpering and cursing, I can't imagine being in his
shoes, I think I'd let go! I couldn't believe that this famous ledge
from the 1950s still harbored so many ants.





![The strangely beautiful gorge Tom and I descended after the bivy on
Middle Cathedral.](images/articles/trips/1999/catwalk.jpg)
![Water was more precious than gold on the East Buttress of Middle
Cathedral Rock. Here's me with the elixir.](images/articles/trips/1999/medrink.jpg)


![](images/articles/trips/1999/midcath.jpg)

![Here's Tom fighting the madding thirst!](images/articles/trips/1999/tomdrink.jpg)


![Tom's bird's eye view high on Middle Cathedral.](images/articles/trips/1999/pitch7.jpg)

Jeez, that was tiring. Above, we enjoy the view again, but boy is it
hot. Water begins to taste so good. Note how important the pictures of
us drinking water are: 2 out of 5 pictures are of drinking water! Our
next problem was one of mutual inexperience, more mine than Tom's.


I think there were three pitches really slowed down by my inability to
clean some cams. They were the HB trigger-style cams. Tom buried them
deeply, which makes so much sense on the lead! But I strained to clean
them, finally hanging on the rope for long periods to work with a
cleaning tool and raw fingers beginning to bleed at the cuticles
(ech). One time I left a cam, so sure that there was no way anyone
including Tom could retrieve it. Well, I lowered him down to the cam,
he cleaned it, and I had that uncomfortable feeling you get when you
are so sure you are right that you are wrong! I felt so bad about
that, thinking I understood the problem, occasionally giving a
mini-speech to the effect that I wouldn't let us down like that again,
no sir!


Well, it happened again. Tom had to lower half a pitch, clean the cam,
and re-climb. So I was dejected.  How do we get off of this thing,
anyhow?


The A0/5.10c bolt ladder was interesting. If I remember correctly, Tom
managed to free it. I didn't even try, but some 5.9 or 5.10a moves
above the ladder were tricky. I remember really admiring some
individual long pitches. I couldn't hand jam worth a darn, maybe that
is why I remember the climb as 1000 feet of liebacking?


On the final pitches it was getting dark. We started to hurry, knowing
that if we couldn't find "the Catwalk" before dark we could be
stuck. I put extra energy into following very quickly on second.  Once
I took this too far, and lunged for a piece with 10 feet of slack rope
below me (I started using dirty tricks once the sun went down). Well
the piece pulled out, and I fell. I could imagine what Tom was
yelling. Later he knocked a rock on me. "OWW!" But the helmet absorbed
the impact, I was just surprised.


We topped out, stowing any congratulations for later. Now we wandered
around unroped on the sloping brushy ledges of the Catwalk, knowing we
had to find our way into a deep gully. Up and down the cliffs we
went. We came to a dark cliff, and Tom wanted to rappel off. I thought
it was crazy, and voted to stay put until morning. I probably actually
said "I'm not going anywhere!"


He took it real well, either agreeing with me on some level or
understanding that I was a frazzled, tired climber who saw himself as
a beginner already in over his head! It was about midnight when we
settled onto a pine-needled cove with an ant-covered rock wall behind
us and scrub trees around.


The chemical aroma of dead ants, a few delicious sips of water, and
bites of a cheese and sausage kit Tom had brought kept us
company. Earlier, while we frantically scrambled the dark cliffs a
flashlight had signaled us from the valley floor. We signaled back
three long dashes, and they went away. I thought it was nice that
someone was thinking about us, and equally nice that we were safely
waiting until morning.


We talked about our jobs, good stuff in life, future ambitions. A nice
time really. My first "unplanned bivouac." The moon rose over the
valley, and I thought back on the last time I watched the moonrise -
two nights before hiking up to Little Yosemite. It was such a
beautiful place, with only thirst and ants to provide discomfort!


Morning came, and we easily found the path leading into the gully. We
made good time, but I needed to rappel a couple of times. I'd never
done such a hard climb or stayed out all night like that, and didn't
trust myself that much. Tom got me to agree that one of the rappels
was unnecessary, but I had to chuckle on the second one, because he
eschewed the rope to prove how easy it was, but looked kind of
sketched on the (seriously) 5.7 slabby downclimbing! Okay 5.5, but did
I say how thirsty I was?


Soon we were down to the car, and off to Camp IV for blessed
sleep. Since then Tom and I exchange Christmas cards. Every time, I am
reminded of this singular climb and excellent companion.  Sorry it
took 5 years to write this Tom!


