---
title: Mount Shuksan Sulphide Glacier
date: 1999-07-10
layout: post
location: Mount Shuksan
---

* Sulphide Glacier, oh, also The Tooth
* July 10-11, 1999


Steve and I set ourselves a blistering pace this weekend, and actually came
through without being complete physical wrecks on Monday!
Interestingly, it was going to be a laid-back trip: climb beautiful
Mt. Shuksan by hiking in Saturday to a camp at 6500 feet, then finish
the climb Sunday, and come home pretty early. I talked to Kris about
our plans, and she said "That's not hard enough for you...you need
more challenge." I balked of course, but she must have planted a seed.

![A craggy ridge across the Sulphide Glacier](images/articles/trips/1999/shridge.jpg)
![The excellent Steve](images/articles/trips/1999/stvport.jpg)
![uh...how do we get down?](images/articles/trips/1999/howdown.jpg)
![Steve walking down to the bivy site](images/articles/trips/1999/figsun.jpg)
![A sturdy yeoman of the glacier](images/articles/trips/1999/shukback.jpg)
![On the way down from the glacier](images/articles/trips/1999/mornwalk.jpg)
![How far to some hot cocoa?](images/articles/trips/1999/trudge.jpg)


After the usual denials, frustrations and full quotas at the ranger
station, we continued merrily on, parking at 2500 feet at the end of a
dirt road north of Baker Lake. We traveled light, but with food, fuel
and sleeping systems to get us through a night on the glacier.  My new
8.5 mm rope with a big improvement over the old heavy 10.5 mm one (2
mm makes a bigger difference in weight than you'd think!).


We didn't feel hurried, but we made good time anyway. I talked a lot
about Yosemite, trying to get Steve psyched to repeat the Royal Arches
with me (I still can't believe Jeff and I did 16 pitches and many
rappels, had a minor disaster and were still back at the car by 4
pm!).  We were sweating like crazy in the humid, still air of the
valley. Even the snow didn't help, until we got into old timber and
ascended a long ridge.


Walking in a forest with 6 feet of old snow on the ground is fun. The
hard snow with nice "cups" for steps. The walking is made easier by
bits of old moss and needles that provide friction. Cool and
quiet. Steve talked about a recent hike with Sarah in a forest like
this, and I thought back to a cross country descent from Kendall Peak
slipping and sliding pleasantly down this kind of snow forest.


We left the trees behind as we toiled up a steep snow slope. At the
top, a man sat alone, seemingly hoping for a party to invite him to
rope up with for the glacier. He said he'd be at the camp, so we
decided to ask him then if he wanted to come with us.


I had to get something from deep in my pack so Steve continued up
around a rock band, and I followed later. This time of total solitude
was novel and fun. I babbled to some east Europeans along the way
about telemark ski bindings, and their oblique responses indicated
that we completely didn't understand each other! When I saw Steve
again, we were at the 6500 foot glacier camp, with a great view of an
icefall on the Sulphide Glacier, and the summit pyramid, which looked
very close.


It was only two o'clock, and we immediately started making water from
the snow. As I tended the stove, we grew restless and started to think
about going for the summit now.


In the car we had talked about wanting to climb the Tooth, an alpine
day climb far away at Snoqualmie Pass. Sadly, we didn't really have a
weekend to reserve for it, so we didn't know when we could do it. One
of us got the bright idea to climb Shuksan, speed down to the car
tonight (in the dark) or tomorrow morning, drive for hours, then hike
into and climb the Tooth Sunday.


A most unholy plan.


Most devious.


Tempting?


OK LET'S DO IT!


The fact that we had already climbed 4000 feet today didn't deter us
from another 2500, so we drank a lot of water and Gatorade, scurrying
up the glacier under the afternoon sun.


A party coming down warned us of a difficult climb on the final 900
feet of summit pyramid. We asked how they did the climb and one of
them said "I don't know you, but I don't hate you, so don't go the way
we went!" From our view, the left skyline looked best, and this
impression had been backed up by a yeoman of the glacier camp.


We unroped at the base of a small waterfall, and stepped from glacial
ice to crumbly rock.  The climbing was harder than it looked, and
boulders hung precariously to the slope, requiring exaggerated care to
move around without disturbing their fitful sleep. Already, we had
come up something we didn't want to try descending, and things got
worse from there. Even as the view of the glacier and our tiny tracks
below became more expansive, we cast worried glances at the rocks
higher up.


Slowly, slowly we moved upward, with many zigs and zags. The sun was
getting low. We peaked around the north side of the pyramid to a
fantastical array of craggy summits made even more unreal by our
precarious position.


Finally, Steve stood cautiously on a level block and I peered over the
rim. Only a quick glance at the steep wall rearing overhead convinced
us both immediately that we were through. "We're going back, this is
it for us."


With this one certain thought against a mountain of uncertainty, we
began picking our way slowly down. Steve took the lead, and I
generally followed the trail he blazed with considerable mental
effort. Sometimes, with a foot dangling in space, I asked where he put
his foot, and a quick word of advice led me to a secure stance.


We didn't want to descend the first part by the waterfall, so we found
an easier way around. This led to steep snow, and then an easy
crevasse crossing. much better than the loose puzzle of boulders that
lay behind us. Once safely on the glacier we breathed a heavy sigh of
relief, and moved quickly back to camp in the evening light. As we
later consoled ourselves, we attempted a new route, and it just
"didn't go," no wounded pride there!


Too exhausted to eat much, we melted snow and watched the sun set as a
dull orange orb to the north of Mt. Baker. From our high perch by the
stove, we watched the purple shadows creep up this mountain, pretty
entranced by it's majesty. Into the bivy sacks and a good nights
sleep.


There were many at this high camp, and by 4 am most of them had left
for the summit. When we had packed up, we saw them high on the
pyramid, making their way up steep snow on the easy route.  At least
now we know the way! It didn't seem worthwhile to go back up, so we
descended 4000 feet in two hours, skiing and running down the first
2000 feet in mere minutes. Steve's ears had to be pressurized several
times!


We predicted 2 hours, and it took us 1 hour and 59 minutes. Getting
good!

### The Tooth

Into the car, zooming to my place, where I can't wait to see Kris and
surprise her with a Sunday morning visit. A happy hug and reunion for
me, but brief. Gathering the rock climbing gear, we continue south to
Snoqualmie Pass, and park among the throngs of day hikers. It was
2:15, and we had 3 miles and 2500 feet to climb. This would put us at
the base of the real climb.


At least for the day, we had become one of that grim set: the mountain
climbers with dour expressions who churn past the tourists; reaching
higher and higher with clanking, mysterious gear. There was no time to
talk, we were motivated by the need to get off the climb before
darkness, and though the sun was bright and shining now, there were
many hours and much uncertainty between us and the safety of home. The
heat and sweat killed our appetite, but we tended our thirst like a
powerful lion on a rusty chain. We drank from a hole in the snow on a
slope above the crowds, continuing into a hidden basin surrounded by
craggy ridges and populated by isolated boulders. In fact, this basin
was like the palate of a mouth, with the Tooth acting as a right side
molar.


Bacteria before us had blazed a trail into a gap and we followed on
the steep snow of the palate.  Encircling a rotted stump, we then
climbed rock to the base of the route, just behind another party who
probably thought they were the last climbers for the day. It was
around 5:00. With no time to lose, we geared up, and I took the first
pitch.


Incredibly fun climbing followed, easy with the right sequences. Good
stances to place gear, and soon I brought Steve up to a wedged boulder
and took off again. We would have swapped leads, but Steve didn't have
rock shoes. In his clunky mountain boots, he had some interesting
times following with brute strength where I had nimbly tiptoed. Steve
enjoyed it though. He led the easier 3rd pitch, thinking he was off
route, but ending up at the perfect spot. From there, one fun pitch
traversed left and up, and soon, we stood on the summit.


This was a fun moment, and our customary summit handshake had special
significance for the efforts of the last two days. Wanting very badly
to linger, we had to say no, and begin the rappels to the base. There
were only four, and I was changing back into my wet mountain boots by
8:30.


Going down was exciting - the snow of the palate had hardened, and I
lost control twice on "controlled slides," getting some good
self-arrest practice in. Got to be more careful. Later, a long sitting
glissade for me, and an expert standing glissade by Steve brought us
to now-deserted Source Lake. The icebergs and turquoise water begged
me to bide a while. Steve knew best however, and set us a brilliant
pace, just tolerable for the distance, not even willing to stop to
turn on a headlamp as we crashed across streams and over logs. I found
myself laughing when several obstacles were clumsily averted by
stomping through the trickles and inky mud of the heavily used
trail. Didn't slow me down though!


Racing and hopping, Steve never used his headlamp, but I gave up just
yards from the car.  "This is ridiculous!"


At 10:15 pm, we sat like zombies. Finally, I started the car.


Don't ask us if we enjoyed it for a while. Have some mercy!



