---
title: Dragontail Peak
date: 2004-6-12
blurb: Serpentine Arete (5.8)
layout: post
---

* Serpentine Arete (5.8, III)

![](images/thewallthere.jpg)

![](images/scramstart.jpg)

![](images/icepits.jpg)

![](images/ldowncruxy.jpg)
![](images/crosstocol.jpg)
![](images/lakefromsum.jpg)
![](images/hangingout.jpg)


Theron Welch and I had a great time climbing Dragontail Peak last
Saturday.  Friday afternoon we eagerly read some trip reports online,
and got our gear together for the drive to Leavenworth. We slept near
the trailhead that night, because we knew Saturday would be a long
day. Theron had read the weather report carefully, learning that bad
weather was scheduled to come in Saturday night, so doing the climb as
a day trip seemed like a better idea than hiking up to the lake and
camping.

We woke to a clear sky, gathered our things and started hiking at 5:45
am.  Hiking quietly beside the river, we enjoyed the familiar
approach, coming to recognize all the turns and viewpoints of the
path. The sky was blue, and I thought about the route ahead. We'd
decided to climb the Serpentine Arete, a 2000 foot high rock climb
that follows one of the backbones of the mountain up from the Colchuck
Glacier. We brought plenty of rock climbing gear, as well as crampons
and light ice axes. Theron forgot his headlamp, so we promised
ourselves to make it back to the car before dark, or at least
somewhere close.

At the lake a little boy was excited that we were climbing Dragontail
Peak.  His mom said he'd been waiting to see someone with that
intention. "I'm too old [for] Dragontail!" he told us, somewhat
nonsensically. At the same time, Theron had loaned me his MP3 player
to listen to a 1950s radio drama called "X minus One." The story was
about people who had died, their brains preserved, and shrunk into the
automaton bodies of "tiny, humanoid maniquins." All for the purpose of
advertising research of course. Later, high on the climb, we would
often laugh recounting some of the great lines.  "I think you should
go" was one of the best, murmured by the protaganist as his secretary
makes creepy flirtatious advances towards him.

We left our ski poles near the lake, and hiked up snow of the Colchuck
Glacier moraine. Crampons were soon useful, and after a short eating
break we made our way to steep snow below the route. We crossed a
bergschrund, and continued up blocky ledges. Then we front-pointed
with our crampons, using the pick of the axe in the ice for
balance. After moving up and right for about 100 feet we reached rock
bands that provided some break from the constant front-pointing
(tiring on the calves). Much to my chagrin, my ice axe sling came
untied and the axe slithered away!

Luckily it stopped a few feet below on a rock step. Without breathing,
I climbed down and grasped it, pretty happy not to lose it on this icy
slope. I attached a carabiner and sling, climbed up to a rocky ledge
and waited for Theron.  While our calf muscles came back to life we
ate some leftover dinner from Medeterranian Kitchen last night - lamb,
rice, tomatoes, onions and hummus!

We changed into rock shoes and Theron started up first. Trying to get
around a rocky corner, he found himself crabbing up lichen-covered
slabs leading to grim terrain. It's the duty of a belayer to heckle in
this situation, so I made the usual remarks about the lack of pro and
flakes of lichen scraping off. Theron or the rock agreed, and they
made a deal that careful moves left would get him around the corner
safely. Soon I was paying out rope by the handful, as he continued up
moderate gullies and corners to a broad ledge.  Following, I
especially remember a burly lieback move to gain the ledge, then a
walk around a corner to more spectacular views. Thusly, one long pitch
of rock above the snow got us to the crux pitch.

Now it was my turn to climb the 5.8 finger-crack and face above. After
some hemming and hawing, I started up from a good fingerlock, then a
shallow hand-jam.  Making a wrong move, I decided to down-climb and
place some pro before continuing. On the down-climb I slipped, caught
by Theron on my first piece of gear. Whew! I got it right the next
time, enjoying the tricky climbing and eventually traversing to a
crack on the right. Proving that my ethics are very poor, I used a cam
as a handhold because it blocked the best spot in the crack to get a
secure hand jam. I decided it was more important to climb fast and
secure than anything else. But now I have to live with myself! Oh the
horror!!

Higher on this pitch, a spectacular corner crack led straight up and
then to a step-across move and the base of an attractive dihedral. I
belayed Theron up while enjoying the scenery which included a bevy of
climbers trooping up the Colchuck Glacier below. Some of them would
look up at us for long periods.

Theron led off, getting some good gear in the tricky dihedral, then
exiting for a pleasant corner crack running right below a roof. After
climbing this enjoyable pitch, we knew we'd finished the technical
crux of the route. And then it started to snow.

This was kind of unnerving with 1200 feet of 4th and 5th class
climbing to go!

So now we climbed more quickly, hoping to be up high before the snow
started to stick to things and melt into an unpleasant sheen of slush
and ice covering the holds. A not-too-difficult offwidth chimney led
to a world of blocks and flakes climbing up the crest. Later 3rd class
terrain was walkable for 30 feet to the base of a headwall. Pausing to
put on rain jackets in the driving snow, we climbed the headwall
carefully via friendly corners and flakes.  Aside from worrying about
the weather, this would be very pleasant terrain, certainly a little
bit loose, but not terrible. We simul-climbed for long pitch after
pitch, occasionally stopping to belay a hard section.

The driving snow seemed to isolate us in our own little world. As the
clouds closed in around us we noticed the unnatural quiet that
snowflakes bring with them.  At other times the wind would blow,
coaxing more snow from the sky. Coming to another headwall, I found
myself before a long right-trending slab. Covered in wet black lichen,
it looked dubious, but better than smooth walls straight above. I
could see a piton in the middle of the slab. With a quickdraw at the
ready, I crabbed out onto it, hands on a rounded lip at the top of the
slab, feet looking for the least slippery steps. As often happens when
you depend on one particular savior, the piton proved
disappointing. It easily came out in my hand, and I wondered what
strange scenario caused it to be there ( a winter climb with frozen
mud?).  Not liking my tenuous position, I moved quietly and precisely
to the end of the slab so I could make many "whoops" of relief and say
stuff to Theron like "Dang, your gonna like that one!" I definitely
wanted to belay Theron on that part, so when continuing up brought me
to a short, steep wall, I placed some gear and belayed. The snowfall
reached maximum output while Theron was crossing the slab, then the
clouds lifted suddenly with a cool, dry wind!



Already the wet rock was drying, and we were finding new things to
smile about.  The psychological mein for grim duty melted away, and we
resurrected an invention from two weeks before: singing Ozzy Osbourne
tunes with the voice of a 1940's librarian (a heavy, out-of-fashion
vibrato). Climbing 20 feet of steep ground, it seemed much easier on
dry rock. Theron took over for the next series of simul-climbing
pitches, leading me up more endless corners, past snow and into
gullies. This part of the climb reminded me of long chimney and gully
pitches on the Sassalungo two years ago.  That climb also had the
sense of going on forever and ever in moderate 5th class gullies and
corners.

Theron thought about leaving the ridge crest, but stayed on it,
climbing the right side of an especially steep headwall. (he was
thankfully out of range of my timorous belay-seat patter about the
dangers of leaving the crest).  I shortened the rope again and began
simul-climbing, now enjoying the views of tiny climbers glissading the
snowy glacier below. Later we found out those climbers had heard our
voices up on the cliff, but could never see us. I felt bad,
remembering all the bad singing and lines from movies!

I led up for the final pitches, exhibiting exceptionally poor
route-finding skills.  First I went up and left, making boulder moves
to get around a corner just to find scary black walls, but with a hint
of easy ground above them. Then I came back a bit and tried to climb
an overhanging lieback crack. "Who am I kidding?" I thought. I had to
clean my gear and downclimb almost to Theron, who sent me off to the
right. I managed to overlook an easy route in lieu of a steep chimney
filled with icicles. Fascinated, I used a #3 Camelot to bash the
icicles away, and put my hand deep in the fissure. One wall was smooth
ice. With Theron keeping the rope tight, I jammed upward, got my foot
up by my head, and shoved myself into a flaring chimney, pack and gear
scraping forcefully. I had just gotten tired of looking for the
easiest way, but I didn't think it would be *that* hard!

Now Theron and I ate the last of our food and changed into boots for a
short but steep snowfield below the final wall. We decided to escape
to the left, rather than switch shoes again to climb a final 5.7
pitch. After eating the last of our food, I crunched up and around a
corner on surprisingly deep, fresh snow on old snow.  It felt so good
to have boots on! Theron began climbing, and we soon rounded another
corner to gain 3rd class terrain below the summit. Climbing another 50
meters up rock and snow, we stood to admire the Stuart Range, held
captive by drifts of cloud. "I wonder if Carlos is over there?" I
said, looking to Prusik Peak.  He was going on his first backpacking
trip to Lake Viviane - did the snow scare him off? Nope, he had an
eventful night in the storm, tent shaking, snow piling up - the works!

But for Theron and I, it was time to make the journey home. Descending
easy terrain, we reached a glissade path, jumping aboard immediately
for a long, fun slide.  We walked to Aasgard Pass, then descended with
a combination of walking, boot-glissading, and sitting glissades. It
was kind of tricky, because the snow was curiously hard, tempting us
to put on crampons. I lost control several times while glissading,
which provided opportunity to practice self-arrest. Since I knew I
could stop myself, I just continued down with aplomb, content with my
icy lot. Theron had no truck with this approach, so I waited for him
in boulders by the lake. Unfortunately I'd let some moisture get near
the video camera, and it complained "DEW DETECTED," disobeying my
order to film Colchuck Lake. We were really asking a lot of a
camcorder! It turned out to be fine.

It took a while getting around the lake, and I was relieved to begin
heading downhill. We zoomed along, passing a few parties (one guy said
"I want to get into climbing, specifically loose, slabby, moss-covered
terrain." I wondered how he had dialed in so well the kind of ground I
try to avoid?). Theron listened to his MP3 player, I communed with the
forest. We stopped for water at the bridge, actually laying
spread-eagled on a slab in the light rain. It felt so good to lie down
though! The onset of shivering and impending approach of the would-be
climber ("Are you undertaking extreme risk-taking behavior up there?")
convinced us to go.

Now the long miles to the car, the same story of hurting feet, wet
underwear (I've gotta quit wearing cotton), sore legs and heavy
pack. This is nothing new, just the price to pay for a day above the
glaciers, moving carefully in sun and snow on the sheer faces.

We reached the car at 8:45 pm, happily avoiding the need for a
headlamp Theron didn't have, just in time to worry about Leavenworth
closing down at 9 pm. Luckily it was Saturday, so we got to have a
huge Italian food meal before hitting the road. I could just see the
waiter rolling his eyes at another hobbling dirty pair, painfully
eager to tell their story of steep and snow, if only...someone would
ask!

Theron as always, was a perfect partner, ready with advice or a funny
character impression to see you safely above. Thanks buddy!

Detailed Notes
--------

We left the car at 5:45 am.

Steep hard snow to get to the climbing, all frontpointing. For Theron,
the most nerve-wracking part, tense for me too. There was a big cliff
below us. I nearly lost my ice axe when the wrist loop sling came
untied. It fell and luckily caught on a rock 10 feet below.

Our pitch 1 was the pitch that led to the first 5.8 pitch.

* Pitch 1: 10:30 am. Theron tried to get into a blocky gully from
our snow-covered ledge, but couldn't figure out a good way to do
it. He placed some gear and continued up mossy steep featureless rock,
hoping to traverse left into the gully higher up.  It looked like 5.9
at least to me! His body started to slither down, and he decided to
give up on that way. We wondered what to do. Another look around the
corner to the left was more fruitful, and provided good climbing
despite a few steps on snow with rock shoes. Theron led a full 60
meters up a long gully then flakes, with a hard lieback move near the
end. Then he walked along a ledge to a gnarled dead tree around the
corner. This pitch took one hour, which kind of scared us. But it did
cover a lot of ground and that transition from snow climbing to rock
climbing is often problematic.

* Pitch 2: 11:30 am. I had a choice of 5.9 climbing in a corner or
a 5.8 face with shallow cracks. I decided on the face because the
corner had vegetation, and what might be a hard exit from an overhang
(might be bomber jams though, a great way to escape!). The first moves
on the face were hard. Standing on the left, I got a good fingerlock
with my right hand, and feet on small ledges. I had placed a small cam
just below. Standing up I could reach a good hand jam. Getting my feet
high (one jammed in the crack, the other smearing), I reached for
another good jam but I had messed up, because the crack flared,
providing a good hold only with my right hand (still jammed in the
crack at my hips). I decided to downclimb, get in sequence and try
again. Also, I should put gear in the hands section because it was a
little dicey above that. While downclimbing, I couldn't find a good
foothold (it was under a lip), and started to fall. "Falling!" I
yelled, as I slithered down. I fell away from the rock and onto my
small cam. Whew!

I tried again, this time adding some pro, and getting the moves right
as the crack flared. Higher, I had a dilemma because I placed a cam in
the most secure handhold location. I grabbed the carabiner on the cam
as a handhold, not concerned with free climbing as precious minutes
were ticking by. Some more interesting moves brought me to a steller
corner crack that I couldn't pass up. Excellent jams and smearing for
feet took me up 30 feet to the exit. As a reward there were
chicken-heads for my feet there. I crossed a slab on the left, and
belayed below an open book. I think I got a picture of Theron climbing
the corner crack, which he described as fist jamming. My hands were
all scraped up from this pitch!


* Pitch 3: Theron now led up the open book, encouraged to place
gear early by my barely adequate gear belay. Despite slipping feet in
the corner, he climbed out of the book, and on to an enjoyable
dihedral leading right under a roof. This was an enjoyable pitch, 5.7
or maybe 5.8 in the open book. I remember asking "did you feel a drop
of rain?"

* Pitch 4: At the belay it started to snow. Small, dry graupel
flakes. We tried to do several things at once, and almost lost
Theron's lunch container. I was eager to reach easy ground before the
snow accumulated, so headed up what was actually a really nice
pitch. A chimney with an overhanging chockstone provided the opening
difficulties, then I entered a sheltered rock garden, making a step
across move to the left. The snow was piling up on ledges, but not
melted yet, so I still had some friction for smearing feet on
walls. After climbing a blocky gully, I continued up loose rock to a
final interesting climbing problem (the details of which escape me
now!), and a ledge.

* Pitch 5: We were eager to begin simul-climbing, especially as
the weather might get much worse. If we could eat up easy terrain we
would have time to go into "ultra-slow-and-safe" mode near the top if
conditions required it, and still have time to escape by day's end. We
coiled some rope around our chests, and began climbing mixed 3rd and
4th class terrain. Theron wisely suggested putting on rain jackets, so
after about 50 meters we joined up to do this, somberly putting away
the video camera as we prepared for suffering up icy cracks and faces!

* Pitch 6: I'd only placed a piece or two, so I continued in the
lead. A wall reared above us, and we climbed gullies with solid flakes
to reach the heart of it. In the driving snow I came to a slab leading
right, with all the other options being featureless or overhanging. I
think Theron belayed me on this part or at least kept slack out of the
rope. I saw a piton 15 feet away in the middle of the slab, so got a
quickdraw ready to clip it. The reason for my apprehension was that
now the rock was wet. And this rock was covered in black lichen, which
is icy slick once soaked. Put all that at an angle, with a few shallow
handholds, and it can provide the scariest terrain of a trip! For me,
this was. What's worse, I reached the piton, and found it so loose I
could remove it with my fingers! Suspiciously, I put it back (I don't
know why). It appeared to be pounded into dirt. Protection
opportunities looked poor (hence the bad piton I suppose), so I
carefully continued on the icy tilted "dance floor." Breathing a sigh
of relief, I moved back left, climbing short steep steps and walking
ledges. By now, the rock faces in the distance had noticable snowy
outlines on all non-vertical surfaces. I protected a short walk across
another "dance floor" with a cam high and a four-foot sling to prevent
rope drag. Once across I tried to climb a steep corner, but quailed at
the difficulty, realizing I needed a belay and some human
proximity. The driving snow seems to increase the distance between
rope-mates, and a good belay at the base of the corner would get me
moving. I'd promised to belay Theron as he crossed the slab, and this
was a good point. He reports that the snow was really driving down as
he crossed. Happily, it started to let up as he finished the
pitch. Tiny figures were walking on the Colchuck Glacier below.

* Pitch 7: As Theron belayed me, I started up the corner,
liebacking more confidently on rock that was already beginning to dry
in the wind. Before, I thought I'd have to aid the section, but with
just a little more friction, the secrets were unlocked. I continued up
terrain of stacked loose blocks and sand, trying to find a place to
belay Theron. Next to a finger of snow below a steep wall, I reeled in
the rope as he climbed. Now we could see distant mountains again, but
dark clouds continued our way as if to say "we'll be back."

* Pitch 8: Theron climbed a short gully then continued on a ledge
leading around right. I was suddenly fearful of leaving the crest, and
recognized the wall above from one of Dave Burdick's photos. Theron
knocked off some loose blocks around the corner, and I scrambled up,
coiling rope around me to get voice contact with Theron. As it turned
out, he'd abandoned the idea to leave the crest, and was climbing the
wall starting from an easier point. We knew that easier terrain lay to
the right of the ridge. But during the snowstorm I'd been looking over
there, only to see dripping gray slabs in the murk, at their worst in
fresh wet snow. Theron continued up pretty friendly terrain: nice 5.0
corners with solid flakes for holds.  We were really thankful the snow
had stopped!

Theron states there was an occasional short crux of maybe 5.4-5.6. He
followed ramps with a zig-zag shape, and after some bad rope drag he
belayed me up to his stance.

 
* Pitch 9: Theron led up more easy terrain and eventually got back
onto the crest.  He could see a distinct notch in front of himself
with a loose-looking gully to the right and more difficult,
snow-covered ground on the left.  He climbed up and over the high
point before the notch only to see that it was too difficult to
descend on either side, or straight over the crest.  So, he removed
his sling around a solid flake and climbed back down to the low point,
set the sling on a lower flake, and downclimbed to the right.  The
ground was loose at the bottom but easy to avoid.  Easy moves led back
to the ridge crest which had flattened out into a face again.  He
continued up maybe 100 more feet, placing slings on flakes for
protection then hip-belayed me up.

* Pitch 10: I was getting really tired, and overburdened due to
extra rope I'd coiled around myself on the previous pitch. I went up
and left, making a hard move around a corner only to see a hint of
easier ground above, passage sadly blocked by black overhanging
slabs. I looked elsewhere for a good way (at one point entertaining an
overhanging hand crack), but finally had to downclimb almost to the
belay. It was pretty hard to downclimb this easy terrain because of
all the things hanging from me, blocking the view of my feet! Theron
suggested looking around to the right, so I went over and saw what
looked like a steep but reasonable exit to lower-angle terrain. It
turned out to be a slightly overhanging crack and chimney, filled with
icicles! But I was tired of hunting around for the best way up, so I
bashed the icicles away and felt around for holds inside. I placed a
camming device, asked Theron to keep the rope tight and started up. It
was odd, because one wall of the crack was smooth ice. I could still
jam my hand in, but I knew it would go numb pretty soon. Thrutching
gracelessly, I managed to get a foot up by my head and by scraping my
back against a wall, move up into a slot that led after more
thrutching to easier terrain. Climbing past more loose blocks, I set a
belay below snow slopes and the final headwall. Theron came up,
chiding me for missing a third class gully around the corner. Shucks!

* Pitch 11: We had to change into boots for snow slopes, and
didn't want to change back into rock shoes for the final 5.7 headwall,
so this was just a steep snow traverse to the left and easier
ground. Then snow and rock slopes led us to the summit at 5:30 pm, for
7 hours on the climb.


We reached the car at 8:45 pm, so 15 hours round trip.




