---
title: Stuart Glacier Couloir
date: 2004-5-1
layout: post
---

* May 1-2, 2004

We engaged in a whirlwind of planning for the weekend, first wondering
about climbing Mt. Shuksan via the North Face, then thinking about
rock climbing as the weather forecast got more pessimistic. We wanted
it all: a visit to high mountains, with exciting exposed vistas too!

Theron and I arrived at the Mountaineer Creek trailhead on Saturday at
about 4:00 pm. My internal clock was all messed-up, as I usually start
a climbing weekend early Saturday morning. So I got up at 6:00 am
anyway, thrumming with excitement, and never got back to sleep. So
Kris and I looked at bonsai trees for a while.

Theron had a mountaineering axe and an ice tool. I had an ice tool and
a compact "3rd tool," meant for those occasions when you drop an ice
tool. But it seemed perfectly adequate for a few mixed moves over
rock, ice and snow. It also had a hammer head.  For the rack, I
brought 3 pitons, 2 ice screws, 10 nuts, 4 cams, and 3 hexes.  For the
rope, we took an 8.5mm 60m rope, which we doubled for the rock
climbing. Bivy sacks, sleeping bags and a stove were our sleeping
gear.

![This poster advertises the Stuart Glacier Couloir movie we made](images/stuarttitle.jpg)

![The north face of Mt. Stuart](images/dermountain.jpg)

![Theron in the upper couloir](images/uppercolvert.jpg)

![Theron on the Stuart Glacier](images/stuartgla.jpg)

![Theron climbing near a constriction in the couloir](images/nearconst.jpg)

We made the familiar hike up Mountaineer's Creek, occasionally filming
with Theron's video camera. I listened to some songs by Tom Waits,
that was fun. We turned left off the trail as it made it's first
switchback up to Stuart Lake. We crashed through some brush and fallen
timber to reach a scary log crossing. Unaware that we were too high,
and there was an easier crossing below, we inched forward on a scary
log above the raging stream.  Theron's backpack nearly knocked him
off-balance as he tried to climb off the log! He had thrown the video
camera across the river to me. I told him I'm a bad catcher, but got
lucky this time. So I filmed the exciting near-debacle.

Later we wandered down to the river from a tedious boulderfield
traverse when we heard my name being called. Dan Smith and friends
were on a faint path in the snow, having just finished a climb of
Argonaut Peak. Another surprise meeting with Dan! We followed their
tracks, grateful to be near the river rather than on the traverse
above which features many ups and downs, and tricky collapsing
snowbridge crossings between large boulders.  I had been that way in
2002 to climb the Ice Cliff Glacier.

As it grew dark, we continued up more steeply to reach the upper
basin. We emerged into a snow-covered meadow at dusk, happily dropping
our gear for the night. I went back 1/4 mile to fill our water
bottles. This saved us stove fuel and time spent melting snow.  Theron
and I weren't impressed with our dinners tonight, possibly because we
had a big Dairy Queen burger just 5 hours before. The peak was
beautiful in the moonlight, with twinkling stars and clear sky.

In the night clouds moved in.

We woke up at 5:30 am the next morning, missing a planned 4:00 am wake
up because I didn't hear my watch alarm. We stepped into cold boots
and munched on pop tarts, wondering what the gray weather would
bring. Starting off eagerly, we both felt strangely worn out, and
resolved to just keep plodding upward until something big stopped us!
There were about 2500 feet of snow slopes to climb before reaching the
couloir, and they seemed to go on forever.  We took long turns
breaking trail, each leading for about 800 feet of vertical gain then
drafting in the kicked steps. Theron punctuated his conversation with
"ugh...yuck...echh" to indicate his feelings about the lowering clouds
and strong wind. We both worked pretty hard to stay motivated!

Finally we climbed past ice blocks on the Stuart Glacier to the base
of the couloir. A ramp led up to the bergschrund where I planted my
tools across a gap above a huge cavern in the snow. I kicked a step
and stood up on the upper wall. My step collapsed but I was able to
land on the lower lip of the schrund. This time, I kicked more
carefully, and it held.  Theron took over the lead, and brought us to
an exciting section where the couloir walls narrowed to just a few
feet across. The snow became harder and icier in here too. I stayed in
the gully on the left while Theron followed shallow snow slopes on the
right, eventually joining my line and leading us over some rotten ice
and mixed moves to the upper snowfield.  As I climbed the ice, much of
it rotted away, water everywhere.

At this point the exposure gets pretty intense - it is a long ways
down! Luckily, the clouds had been lifting and breaking up. We
expected some sun at the West Ridge Notch, 1000 feet above. But we
also worried about the wind. We'd already encountered some strong
gusts, and had some trepidation about teetering around on the ridge
crest in such wind. No matter, we weren't going down now! I started
kicking steps, but pretty soon my crampons were balling up on every
step. It was especially bad, and after a few nerve-wracking occasions
of a balled-up foot slicing through the snow I had to stomp out a
platform to remove my crampons. Theron came up and did the same. It
was an awesome perch, looking down on Stuart Lake and across to the
craggy North Ridge. The climb to the notch felt especially long, I
remember counting the last 27 steps!

Instantly in a world of wind but also sun, I set about getting my
harness on. Theron came up and got the rope out of his pack. I tried
to decide what gloves to wear, having brought 3 pairs to be ready for
anything. I settled for lightweight black North Face WindStopper
gloves that seemed like a good compromise for mixed snow and rock
climbing. Theron and I were both a little worried about this portion
of the climb. Our previous "snowed up rock climb" trips had ended
poorly. The North Buttress of Argonaut in falling snow quickly turned
into a sketchy aid climb and subsequent rout. The Tooth in strong wind
and snow scared us away on the first pitch. With these
less-than-stellar credentials behind us, perhaps we would somehow be
shut down. So it felt kind of committing and scary to set out around
the corner for the first lead.

Climbing without crampons was a good idea, as I found either bare rock
or snow traversing the south side of the ridge. Eventually an icy
downclimb prompted me to hammer a knifeblade piton into a shallow
crack. I belayed Theron over from a snow belay below a notch. It was
his first time to remove a piton, so I wanted to be close enough to
describe the method.  Theron put me on belay from a sling around a
horn, and I climbed blocky 4th class rock for 30 meters to another
notch with outrageous wind. Now it was time to traverse on the north
side to avoid steep walls on the ridge crest. Some tracks in the snow
enticed me out onto the north face, where solid rock handholds and
snowy steps led around and up.  This was some of the best climbing: a
really neat mix of grand exposure, solid chunky handholds, and enough
snow to require creative counterpressure moves or the occasional
handjam in a snowy crack. I built a belay anchor in a cramped corner,
and enjoyed the view while Theron came around.

"So far so good!" "I hope we are on the right track!" We were
cautiously optimistic at this point, with blue sky overhead and plenty
of daylight left. For the next pitch, I made a strenuous move around a
corner on the left, and climbed above Theron and his tiny perch on the
face. Climbing a steep snow gully with an ice hammer in one hand and
the other hand on rock, I made steady progress towards the ridge
crest. A knifeblade piton provided security. I ran out of rope exactly
at the crest, building a nut belay even as Theron was climbing the
strenuous move. A fall there might have been interesting, with me
scrabbling to clip in to the belay with a lot of weight on my legs!
Luckily, he found it easier than I did!

![At the windy West Ridge Notch](images/windynotch.jpg)

![Looking down from the notch.](images/fromnotch.jpg)

![Theron is just visible on the North Face.](images/onnorth1.jpg)

![Climbing to a high ridge notch.](images/onnorth.jpg)

![Sun and wind 3 pitches below the summit.](images/sunandwind.jpg)

![Climbing on the last pitch.](images/lastpitchs.jpg)

![Looking back at the summit from near the false summit.](images/nearfalse.jpg)

It was fun sitting on the ridge crest in the sun watching Theron make
his way up the shallow gully. We'd done so much climbing today, it
already seemed a day packed with many different experiences. I was
down to my last sips of water, getting really thirsty. We climbed
slightly up then down 20 feet to a long ledge. Another traversing
pitch led further right, then I started climbing up at what looked
like the likely spot. If we kept going further, the walls became steep
and foreboding. We were having a good time. The next pitch was an easy
5th class chimney, mostly snow free, then easy ground to a tricky
rightward traversing move. I brought Theron up from a solid angle
piton and nut belay.

The last full pitch had the most pure rock climbing. A clean 5.6 crack
above us to the right proved very interesting in heavy mountain
boots. It was well protected and fun. I think I took my gloves off for
better jamming. I belayed after some blocky climbing at a spot near
the summit. Very tired, but pleased, I waited for Theron to start
climbing. He never did, so I tugged on the rope kind of rudely. In the
screaming wind we could barely hear a scream. "Why me?" I thought. I
realized there was some kind of rope drag, and finally resorted to
hauling the rope with incredible effort. By the time Theron arrived I
was in a foul mood because I should have down-climbed to find the
constriction that had the rope - it would have saved plenty of time
and energy.  As it was, that last pitch took a long time due to the
error, and Theron had to deal with one rope being completely slack on
the crux, with only one strand belaying him.  "Grrrr!" I said, as
Theron took off for the summit. Again the rope got caught in
something, so I emerged on the summit with coils looped around me
every which way.  Kind of hard to remove them in the walloping wind!

We took a few minutes to marvel at the views, which are amazing from
this peak.  We had really worked for the summit, and felt kind of
tired. After some food, photographs, video, and putting gear away, we
started down towards the false summit. Soon out of the wind, we
descended an extremely rotten snow slope over boulders. Now I was
dripping sweat and dealing with entire walls of snow that would
collapse into water the moment you depend on it with an ice axe. I
followed some old tracks, yelping my way into one big hole after
another, buried hip-deep in watery snow. Finally we learned to stay on
the rocks and avoid the snow completely. Rounding the false summit, we
were surprised at the time and effort it took to get here. Now on snow
back in the shade, we stomped easily down past the Ice Cliff Glacier
exit to the Sherpa Glacier. I was so thirsty, I had to eat some
ice. We easily stomped down, trying a few bumpy glissades, soon
crossing the snow-covered bergschrund of the Sherpa Glacier.

Here the snow became our enemy. I still have bruises on my shins from
the crusty surface that scrapes your leg as you remove each foot from
it's deep hole above. We wallowed slowly down, praying for a slope we
could glissade. After a long time, we found some good terrain and snow
to match, enjoying over 500 feet of glissading to the flat basin with
our camp. "Thanks for that!" we told the snow.

We realized how busy we'd been all day, I was looking forward to
thinking back on the great climbing, the creative belay stations, the
airy views. There was so little time while doing it! On such climbs,
you are storing up memories for a few hours later!

We packed up and set a fast pace down the valley, really keen on
making it to the river before dark, as the thin log crossing was scary
enough in the light. We hoped to follow Dan's tracks on a better
route, but it's so easy to lose tracks in a mixed snow/dirt forest at
dusk. Stomping along, we made it down to the long river walk, and did
find the diverging tracks. Theron took the lead and set a more
blistering pace, keen to avoid some kind of uncomfortable bivy on a
hillside. We had just wrung a quart of water out of our socks, so we
were full of the "creature discomforts" that make one press for home!
In the race for the dusk river crossing, we crossed a minor stream on
a log and bramble patch.  To my horror, I lost my balance and fell
into the shallow stream! Somehow I only managed to soak the right side
of my body and quickly get up cursing like a whale. My right boot
sloshed with another quart of water.

Theron led us over some flat rocky slabs with occasional cairns. He
had a new-found energy and was enjoying keeping a tricky trail at
dusk. Lo and behold, we were soon at a absolutely luxurious river
crossing on low broad logs. Wow, was that easy or what? Some more
fooling around in the brambles, and we landed on the Stuart Lake Trail
at full dark.

Now I'd been dreaming of water for hours, but was too busy to stop at
all the flowing streams around us. We stopped. I drank a full quart,
shivered uncontrollably, and got walking again. I was not looking
forward to yet another forced march out of this country (how many
times have I done it?). I persuaded Theron that I would be as slow as
molasses, so he took off with the car keys, dreaming of dry feet. I
got my MP3 player out, and focused on the music, the moon and stars,
and an occasional stop to look up at them. After a few miles, I was
actually enjoying myself.  Somebody said "99% of enjoyment is just
slowing up," and I found truth in that.  As it was, I emerged at the
car only 10 minutes behind, but with a lot less of the usual
"deathmarch" mentality for coming out so late.

Theron and I undertook a Quest for Food, making due with half-cooked
microwave burritos on the way home. The next day I ate a vast acreage
of Mexican Food.  I forgot to mention how hungry I'd been on Sunday,
drastically underestimating my food desires! Thanks tons to Theron for
a great trip!

