---
title: Whitehorse Mountain
date: 2004-3-13
blurb: via Snow Gulch
layout: post
location: Whitehorse Mountain
---

* Whitehorse Glacier

Robert and I turned right onto Mine Road and bumped our way to near
the end.  As we got ready for the climb, a pickup truck arrived with
four guys intent on the route. Always happy for more step-kickers, we
wished them well and began hiking. At the end of the road is a
spectacular view of the route - you really have to tilt your head up
to see what you are in for. The lower section of Snow Gulch is a
mixture of waterfalls, black wet rock, and brushy tangled
slopes. Above, hummocks of snow lead to a few blue-gray crevasses and
black false summits.

As Matt Perkins 
had advised in emailed beta two years before (I'm a
pack rat), we took a left fork in the Gulch, soon coming to an
impassable waterfall with steep brush slopes on the left, and a
somewhat more secure looking brush wall on the right. We chose the
latter, grimacing somewhat as we began clawing through the tiny trees
on a slithery 40 degree slope. Crampons were pretty useful here!

![A ridge west of the summit.](images/articles/trips/2004/whitehridge.jpg)
![Robert leading sketchy moss/jungle.](images/articles/trips/2004/mosstech.jpg)
![Happy to leave the brush behind.](images/articles/trips/2004/outofbrush.jpg)
![Ice climbs on the west side of the glacier.](images/articles/trips/2004/iceroutew.jpg)
![Robert on the glacier.](images/articles/trips/2004/robertslope.jpg)
![Walking to the summit.](images/articles/trips/2004/walktosumw.jpg)
![Looking to the south.](images/articles/trips/2004/viewsouthw.jpg)
![Looking at Three Fingers Mountain.](images/articles/trips/2004/threefing.jpg)
![Bob rappelling from the summit. ](images/articles/trips/2004/rappel1_bob.jpg)
![High Pass from the south side of Whitehorse Ridge.](images/articles/trips/2004/highpass2.jpg)
![Drawing of our route up and down.](images/articles/trips/2004/routedraw.jpg)

I stopped to pick pine needles out of my eyeballs while Robert took
the next leg, trending right to avoid an overhanging wall above. He
led back left across a wall with an exciting bouldering problem that
depended on equal weight distribution between a barely connected
branch, a rock that would fall out if you pulled it the wrong way, and
a divot under a moss carpet that would hold one crampon point. This
led to a ledge (don't even try to find this place by the way!) where
we roped up for a short pitch further left to easier ground. It was
funny to be getting the rope out 4000 feet below the summit, far below
timberline.

While I belayed, the party of four amazingly found our tiny perch in
the vertical jungle. I began simul-climbing and they asked if the rope
was still available, then pointed out that they had their own
rope. That was good because I didn't want to wait for them to do the
bouldering problem and gather on the ledge. I started climbing so
Robert could reach a tree belay. We didn't see those guys again, and
wondered how we could have helped them. The one protection point on
the pitch would have taken a sling, and we imagined that if they had a
rope, they would have a sling too.

*Brian and his party didn't elect to cross the moss cliff,
instead they found the correct trail on the left side of Snow
Gulch. They climbed to 4700 feet but turned around due to time. Brian
told me that on the way down they saw 4 more people near the bottom of
the Gulch!*

A bit tired from fights with the little trees, we continued to the
snow-covered hummocks that characterize the middle basin. From here we
decided that on the descent we'd definitely go down the right side of
the basin (as you are looking up at it), because good snow cover led
to a very short cliff we could rappel from. Matt Perkins had done
something similar before - it would at least be quicker than the way
we'd come up.

On the hard snow, long sessions of ankle-twisting french technique up
the slopes made us realize we'd have sore feet later. We had wondered
what boots to take, each settling for a more-or-less floppy boot
instead of a full-shank model.

Just as we decided dull gray high clouds were going to stay, sections
of blue sky began to appear. Would this mountain ever run out of
avalanche debries?  There must be a constant roar of chunky snow
blocks rolling down in this Gulch during a storm. What a mousetrap in
the wrong conditions! We started to see interesting cliffs on the
right, and crevasses began to appear in the snow, indicating that we
were on the Whitehorse Glacier. Slots were so well filled in that we
didn't rope up. The cliffs on the right now had luxurious lines of
water ice snaking down, and Robert pointed out a sort of "NE Slab of
the Tooth" formation. Interesting snow couloirs and frightening
overhanging chimneys laced the cliffs on both sides. We resolved to
come back and climb them (as if ;-)).

As we must when visiting this area, we thought about CAndS.Net, Hooter
Cave and that great song "You really have to wonder...what's in
there?"  (CAndS.Net was a peculiar web site dedicated to rock
climbs in the Darrington area. Hooter Cave and the song mentioned were
features of the strange and fascinating site, now dead for years.)
There is a special mystery about Darrington climbing, fun to
comtemplate as we cramponed up endless slopes. I think Hooter Cave was
a place where this group would cache their gear, possibly a mile to
the south in the rugged Three Fingers/Liberty Peak area. Wow, that's
neat and wierd.

We came to a broad basin with steep exits on the left and right. The
right had a bergschrund we'd probably want to rope up for. The left
looked gentler.  The middle had an impressive curtain of water ice. We
decided to go up the middle and veer left below the curtain for nice
variety. Too steep for french technique, we would front point for
stretches with one hand and one ice pick on the snow, occasionally
splaying one foot or the other for a rest. The angle was around 45
degrees for almost 1000 feet. I had to pound my axe in well and rest a
few times. All the same, this was the most enjoyable part of the
climb, as the cliffs and icefalls were made more brilliant by the
exposure in all directions. We emerged onto a ridge crest, really
pleased by some softer snow with level kicked steps from a party
above. Flopping down for a rest in the sun, we watched this party of
three finish the summit pitch.


Wow, that means 3+2+4 = 9 potential climbers on this route today. I
tend to think that is a crowd for the route! After I ate some cookies
and Robert endured some unappealing "Hickory Farms" cheese, we wobbled
our sore legs and feet on to the summit. The last 20 feet were pretty
exciting, made easier for us by some good steps and axe-shaft
placements made by the group watching us from the summit. The last
move required the axe planted in a scrim of water ice over rock and
some good balance. We were happy to meet Jon, Vlad and Bob here.

We also met the incredible scene of tortured topography given by
territory to the south. No wonder it's a place of washed-out roads and
private fiefdoms like Hooter Cave. Though close to roads and towns,
these dim valleys seem ignorant of people. We could see Craig Lakes
and Mt. Bullon in front of Three Fingers Mountain. Notable was the
West Face of Sloan, like a layer cake of reddish rock with bands of
icing. The North Face of Big Four Mountain was distant but
unmistakable. To the north and east rose the volcanos and peaks such
as Shuksan, Eldorado and Dome. I kept calling Mt. Higgins Mt. Hinman.

It was great to sit for a few minutes. The time was around 1 pm. Not
eager to frontpoint down so many steep icy slopes, the five of us
decided to go home via Lone Tree Pass. I had been beyond the pass 3
years ago with Peter and Jake (I wish they could have been here
today. Robert and I also wished that Theron could join us, but alas!
he was suffering from a stomach malady).

We made a 30 meter rappel, tying our rope together with Jon's. I was
the last to descend, and had to carefully position the knot below
where the ropes cut into the snow - no one likes to retrieve a stuck
rope! Downclimbing took us to easier slopes where we could walk to
High Pass at 6000 feet. (*note: the USGS map marks the summit in the
wrong place, and doesn't mark High Pass at all. It is on the west edge
of the glacier.*)

Removing crampons, we glissaded down from High Pass, and began a
tiring mile-long traverse. After postholing to exhaustion, Robert and
I decided to put on snowshoes. Almost immediately we saw what a bad
idea that was.  Normally, the MSR snowshoes perform very well on
traverses, especially compared to other snowshoe brands. But today,
with a sugary 2 inch layer over a hard crust, we were sliding and
straining down the slope with every step. They were useless. Soon the
five of us were taking turns making a track across the slope. This
south side snow was baking, and soon my boots were squishing with
water despite a waterproofing application in the morning.  I
remembered the point to turn up to reach Lone Tree Pass, and we
tiredly regained 400 feet. Somewhat crestfallen, at the top we
realized that the pass was further away on the ridge. I recognized a
distinctive snowy hump as the view spot for pictures 3 years
before. We plodded further, almost giving in to descending a gully
east of the true pass. Robert and I went 50 feet down, then cautiously
concluded it wasn't worth the risk, as there was a section of gully we
couldn't see. Cliffs? We tiredly (*using that word a lot, aren't
I?*) climbed back up and plodded on to the pass.

Later, Vlad would look back and discover a cliff blocking that gully,
at least 100 feet high. It was a good choice to be prudent!

At the pass we imagined a long glissade run, but it was not to
be. Just as on the glacier, slopes were frozen hard. I nearly shredded
my pants on a few hundred feet of ice-glissading, then switched back
to crampons to walk down a few thousand feet. I didn't know the time,
but it was getting dark. I remember focusing on my little view of
feet, ice axe, and slope ahead of me for long periods. I would look up
and take in the expanse of country, including Darrington 4000 feet
below, and nearly get vertigo from the contrast. Then I'd go back to
work.

The trees started to appear, and we continued on suddenly soft snow in
snowshoes to the left of a creek leading down. Robert spied some
flagging at 2800 feet, and we plunged into the dark forest, soon
getting headlamps ready and hoping to find the trail again (which we'd
already lost).

Everyone was really tired. Robert looked tired and sunburned, but he
kept plunging down through one stand of Devil's Club after another. I
was distracted by thirst - nothing to drink since the summit, and now
streams could be heard beneath snow or muddy puddles would wink at me
in the glow of my headlamp. But to stop before finding the trail would
seal a night of discomfort. So I was content to plunge down in
squelching boots and gloves, dreaming of water. Bob, Vlad and Jon were
staying high, believing they would hit the trail by travelling
north. We didn't put much faith in the squiggly trail line on the map,
and Robert had spent enough time in front looking for the lost trail
that it seemed counter-productive. So we said goodbye and kept going
down.

But cliffs blocked us, and we came to an alder slope back in sight of
our friends. They had seen a piece of the trail above, and were pretty
certain it would be found on the other side of the alder. Robert
couldn't imagine anyone building a trail through the alder. I tried
mightily to remember 3 years ago - we stumbled out in the dark then,
on the trail. Should we go straight down or at least cross the field?
Why travel horizonally when we can lose some elevation? We did because
Jon was more certain about it than we figured he had a right to be, we
knew more cliffs were directly below, and finally - why not? We'll be
coming out in pitch dark anyway.

So we crossed. I remember a funny moment when Robert swung down and
across a log by holding three dead stalks of alder as a rope. I tried
the same, the alder broke, and I enjoyed an exciting ride through the
dark forest.  The fact that I had energy to laugh must have been a
good thing! Almost across, we heard Jon exclaim "*I'm on the
trail!*"

And that my friends, is why this isn't a story of yet another
unplanned bivy!

The adventure over, we made our way 2000 feet down to the car,
chatting about work and climbs future and past. Vlad shared some water
with us, and we hiked up the road to my car. An eerie light on the
road turned out to be my interior car light. Also, the door was
unlocked. After checking the car for mysterious Bulgarians (A
fascinating story about a Bulgarian fugitive who hid for years on the
slopes of Whitehorse Mountain. Source:
http://klipsun.wwu.edu/1998/september/stor3.html), we drove with our
new friends to a diner in Arlington where we all competed to eat the
most in the form of milk shakes, steak, chicken, potatoes, clam
chowder, rolls and other sundries.

This was a great climb to do, at the start of a season where I felt
out of shape thanks to more lift-served skiing than climbing. I'm
still out of shape, but I can enjoy a good sufferfest anyway. Jon,
Vlad and Bob were really cool, thanks for being there guys! A big
thanks to Robert!  I'm outta here!

*Note: The photo with a drawn route in Beckey's Cascade Alpine
Guide is wrong. It is describing a climb of the Sill Glaciers from
Wellman Basin. Matt Perkins told Beckey about the mistake a cupla
times.*

