---
title: April Setzberg Hike
date: 2006-4-21
layout: post
category:
  - hiking
location:
  - Setzberg
elevation: 900
---

### Setzberg Hike
_April 21, 2006_

Now that I (proudly) own a car, I could make a Dawn Patrol trip from Munich
before work. After several days of procrastination or laziness about getting up
early, I lucked out and made my move on a beautiful blue sky day. I drove to
the Tegernsee intent on a hiking trail up the mountain that dominates the south
shore of the lake: Wallberg. I brought gaitors and ski poles, having no idea
how much snow would still be lying around. Happily, the steep and wide trail
from the Wallbergbahn was mostly snowfree. The trail contoured up and around
the western side of the mountain, crossing a ski area path. At a junction, I
opted to stay on the contouring trail rather than ascend a steep snowy path. I
continued to a hut and then a snowy meadow. Now the trail ascended in short
switchbacks up through pleasant boulder gardens in the forest. Soon I was back
in an open area, traversing a hillside with expansive views to reach the upper
station of the Wallbergbahn and a few other buildings.

Here I made a mistake, following tracks in the snow steeply up Setzberg. Only
at the top did I realize the error, as I looked back at the summit with nearly
the same elevation behind me. I enjoyed the rugged mountains to the south and
ate an apple. Such a beautiful place!

After a few minutes a fellow came up. His name is Martin and he is an avid
trail runner. He pointed out many mountains, having climbed, skied, or hiked
them all. We went down together, me working hard to keep up with a blistering
pace! Martin led us on a shortcut down steep half-forgotten trails, and
skipping and running down snowfields. I think we were back at the cars in 30
minutes. Great to meet a new "friend o' the mountains" :-).
