---
title: Jogging to Kendall Katwalk
date: 2005-6-11
layout: post
category:
  - hiking
guests:
  - Nathan
---

### Gold Creek to the Kendall Katwalk, down the PCT, June 11 2005

The Gold Creek trailhead is now at Gold Pond, and the road to the old trailhead
is locked. We started walking at noon under gray skies but no rain. The trail is
in fine shape, we had no problem with a beaver pond sometimes mentioned as an
obstacle. After three miles, we reached the crossing of Gold Creek, first
removing our shoes and socks to make the cold but easy ford. On the other side
of the creek, the trail is less-travelled but still in fine shape. Soon we
turned left at a junction to climb to Alaska Lake. This mile is steep but
entertaining: rock and root steps along a hogback ridge with crashing rapids far
down on the left. At the lake we had a vague notion that there would be a trail
to reach the PCT contouring above. We didn't find anything nice, so we settled
for a game trail going steeply up on the left, climbing a ridge that runs
east-west on the south side of the lake. Rain-soaked brush was unpleasant, but
the way was reasonable enough. We feared making an error and losing our way in
the rain/sleet/snow/fog mix, so we stuck to the ridge crest as a precaution. The
trail became better as it led north towards the PCT, and the country got that
beautiful granite garden look that characterizes the beautiful mile east of the
Katwalk.  Meeting the PCT just west of Ridge Lake, we alternately jogged and
stopped to gape at the fantastic scenery when the clouds parted. We were blessed
with sun-rays and crystal-clear vistas down to Gold Creek and across to Kendall
Peak(s). Once near the Katwalk, the view machine shut down and we fumbled along
the granite sidewalk in the mist. Nathan, running along and peering across the
Commonwealth at Guye Peak, tripped spectacularly in a jumble of limbs. If only I
had a video camera! We cruised down the PCT, then took the 2 mile abandoned
Commonwealth Basin trail to the PCT trailhead. It is still in fine shape.



We hopped on the bikes stashed near the trailhead and pedalled down the highway in driving rain back to the car at Gold Pond. Reaching it at 5:30, and dreaming of hot chocolate and dry clothes, a new (and much more miserable) adventure began. Let me just say this: if you can open your car with an electronic keychain or with a key, go ahead and take the key in case the keychain decides to short out.



It is a great loop trip, if you don't mind fording Gold Creek and dealing with a faint brushy trail between Alaska Lake and the PCT. 

