---
title: Grossglockner attempt
date: 2006-8-10
blurb: woefully unprepared
layout: post
location: Grossglockner
---

Saturday Mat and I left Garmisch hoping to do an alpine climb. But the Engadin
valley, our hopeful destination, was wrapped in clouds. Mat was keen on climbing
the Grossglockner, so we figured we could first do some sport climbing in Zirl,
then drive down there in the evening.


First the sport climbing was really fun. We did a route with 4 short pitches of
5+, 6, 5, 5. Mat led the first two pitches as one, then I led the second set. We
rapped the route. Next door was a harder route with pitches of 7-,5+,7,5. Mat
led the 7 pitches, both of which had cruxes too hard for me, so I had to pull on
quickdraws and hang liberally. I led the easier pitches, the first of which was
pretty run out. This time we walked down. I brought my camera but forgot the
memory card, so there are no pictures of this trip. Alas!


Later after a pizza dinner we drove to the Franz Josef Hoehe and bedded down for
the night at 1 am. Our alarm was set for 3 am! We were hiking a bit before 3:30,
and making for the Pavacinni Couloir. After a long walk up the glacier in
crampons, Mat thought he saw where we should turn up to gain the bivy shelter
near the base of the route. But on the map it showed complete glacier coverage,
while in the pre-dawn darkness it was clear there was no glacier. I thought it
must be the next rock outcrop where we turn up, which had a big white glacier in
front of it.


Once on the side glacier we were climbing fairly steeply up ice slopes. It had
been more than a year since I'd been on such slopes, and it was hard to get used
to again. Finally we were front-pointing and using two axes. My floppy boots and
old style crampons were proving to be no match for this terrain. While following
Mat up an ice gully a crampon slipped and I was caught by my tools. This was
creepy. We got up to a flatter area and I tightened my boots and crampons which
I really needed to do. I didn't expect such icy uncompromising terrain, and
worried a little about the big couloir we hadn't even gotten close to yet.


It got lighter and we came to a wall of ice. I told Mat I needed a belay on these walls, due to not trusting my boots at all. I was disappointed to need to rope up (and thus travel more slowly) with so much terrain still ahead of us, but without complete faith in your equipment and ability on icy terrain progress will grind to a halt anyway. Mat led out and then I followed the pitch on belay, really glad I'd asked for it.


It got lighter and we climbed several more little ice walls, along with some
easier weaving in and out of crevasses. This glacier was steeper and more
difficult than we expected! A memorable pitch was sticking crampon points into
one wall of a crevasse and putting hands or back on the other wall. I also
enjoyed using the ice as handholds sometimes, a recommendation I remember
reading in the Chouinard Climbing Ice book. It really did speed things up.


Finally we were on the upper flat part of the glacier, but still in a maze of
crevasses. We saw the fabled couloir far to our left, and gradually realized
we'd climbed the wrong glacier! We did go one glacier too far. Getting back to
where we needed to be would be very difficult. Plus, it was raining pretty
steadily, the upper mountain was sheathed in cloud, and the couloir promised to
be bare rock at it's base and time-consuming ice above. With my boot situation,
I knew I wasn't properly equipped for the climb. As the rain increased, we
decided to go down.


Descending steep ice takes a lot of time! I went in front, then when we reached
the ice walls, Mat put in an ice screw and belayed me down. I'd place a screw
and belay him down, or sometimes he'd just come down casually. For me, the
front-pointing down climbing was a lot of work because I was really tense. I
never had to front point down so much hard steep ice. Actually, it was great
practice and I'm glad we got to do it. Still, the lower section of steep
flat-footing and more front pointing without a belay took a lot out of me.


Mat hiked up to the head of the glacier and I followed until I got hungry and
wanted some warm gloves, hiking back to sit on my pack and look at the
mountains. After walking down a ways we completely confirmed our mistake and
identified the correct way to go for the next attempt.


The 300 meter hike back up to Franz Josef Hoehe seemed to take me forever. Mat was waiting, seemingly ready to climb something else!


On the long drive back to Garmisch we had constant sun, as this land was well
protected by a Foehn wind. I took a nap at Mat's house, then we had some coffee
and exchanged stories. Thanks to Mat for a great trip - good lessons and
practice were learned on a steep glacier, probably rarely visited by the sane!
"We need to get stronger," Mat said diplomatically. I am really out of shape
this year!

