---
title: Fitness
date: 2007-2-13
layout: post
---

I always seem to struggle with staying fit. I'll work out hard for a few
months, then summer comes and I figure I'm climbing enough so I don't need
to do it any more. Then in the fall and early winter lazyness rules the
day! I found a note I wrote in 2005 on cascadeclimbers.com, and it's useful
to where I am now (again, need to lose weight!):
  
  
I lost 18 pounds since March, from 196 to 178\. Couple of observations:
  
---
  
1) I tried the atkins diet (I know, start yelling), as I'd had good results
with it 2 years before. It didn't seem to work this time.
  
2) I went trail running a lot January to March. That got me to 188 or
so, but then stubborn.
  
3) I got frustrated because I was excercising a lot, but not losing any
more weight. So...
  
4) I bought a fad diet book, called "The Ultimate New York Body Plan,"
by a cheesy supermodel consultant guy. \> I followed it exactly, with the
indispensable help of my wife making the assigned meals to the letter.
The food was like Atkins, pretty much: lean meat and green vegatables,
very little else. 5 meals a day. 45 minutes to 1.5 hour workout per day,
for 14 days.
  
  
It worked really well, helping me lose 12 pounds by the end of two weeks.
Now I could climb a bit harder in the gym, which was exciting. I also found
that it was better from a weight-loss perspective to go easier on the cardio
workout. More like 45 minutes at 140 bpm, instead of 150-160 like I was
doing before with trail running (or higher). I don't know why that's true
and folks have told me that doesn't make sense, but it's an important component
(for me).
  
  
I've decided also that weighing myself every day is a big help, and writing
down what I ate. There is a direct link between how much you eat, how much
you exercise and weight gain or loss. I am a "master of the obvious" but
writing it down and weighing every day keeps me honest.
  
  
I am 5'11" and would like to be about 170, so I have a few more pounds
to go. It's actually been a fun journey, though it took reaching a point
of frustration to get militant about it and do it right. "
  
  
Good stuff to remember!
