---
title: The Gaze of Others
date: 2019-11-7
layout: post
excerpt: "I saw that the gaze of others made me tense and full of fear..."
tags: [spirituality]
image: /images/board-meeting.jpg
---

*The shock of steady regard on display here is from Flickr user
[Katie Cook](https://flickr.com/photos/cielokatie/). It is
used here under a Creative Commons [Attribution 2.0 Generic license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/).*

I saw that the gaze of others made me tense and full of fear. I felt I
had to prove myself, and this led me into loops of nervous activity.
Each action trivial, but (over) valued for the imagined effect on
the being who I felt "less-than."

Finally, all of this tension dissolved when I saw there is nothing
*real* to fear.

If a being looks at me, the *real* part of their gaze is one already
known to me: it is the gaze of the eternal listening attention. It is
the gaze of God.

There is nothing to fear from this gaze. It is already always with you.
You are always looked upon in the deepest parts of your being.

When you fear the gaze of another, you are valuing the unreal part of
them. It is the unreal part of you that values this component of
their gaze. Why? Because it values itself, and like knows like.

*You* have already learned better. You actually have some idea of where
real value lies.

So accept and be honored by the gaze of others. Do not see the
unreal aspect. Only the pure attention beholding itself.

Freedom must be the freedom to choose. You can choose to see and
value the higher frequencies of the gaze. You can choose not to grant
the lower frequencies any importance.

Your accuser, then, is your brother. The greater his wrath, the greater
your gain, for intensity of feeling is itself an accelerant and
focusing of Awareness in the midst of storm and chaos.

*I am here. I am glad that you are here.*
