---
title: The Matterhorn, Hoernligrat
blurb: with Theron Welch
category: climbing
date: 2008-07-11
layout: post
location: Matterhorn
guests: Theron
---

Posted at Summitpost [here](https://www.summitpost.org/my-experience-on-the-matterhorn/450263)

* The Matterhorn
* Via the Hoernli Ridge (AD-)
* July, 2008


# Motivations


Sadly, when I thought about climbing the Matterhorn, I pictured crowds of
stressed-out climbers stepping all over each other and cursing as they fought
to get to the summit. Then I imagined accidents in which one clumsy team pulls
another one off their stance. Finally, expensive helicopter rescues, bad
weather and crowded huts. All that "thinking" had a way of exhausting me so it
was easy to push the idea out of my mind.

But it is a "climber's mountain," just by the look of it. And I did finally get
the itch to climb it. Kris, me, the boys and Kris's parents were on vacation in
Zermatt and on the second day I went for a hike up the Höhbalmen meadows that
rise steeply just west of town. It was mid-June, after a very snowy spring, but
the day was clear. At the trail junction where you can go north to Trift or
west on balconies below the Unter Gabelhorn I sat on some rocks and starting
watching the Matterhorn. From this absolutely perfect location, the Hörnli
Ridge conveys the perfect mix of danger and allure that makes it seem a very
worthwhile goal indeed. The summit is only five miles from town, but it is
almost 10,000 feet above it. And unlike many high mountains, there is no "easy"
way to the summit. But most importantly, from here, the mountain and it's
famous ridge had a beauty that compels.

I'd always thought that if I did ever climb the mountain, it would be from a
more difficult and less traveled route like the Zmutt Ridge. But honestly,
looking at the Hörnli Ridge head on, I decided that this was the way, despite
crowds. It would be worth it. I had the same feeling as looking at the North
Face of Johannesburg Mountain in the North Cascades, or Mount Goode further
north. Both of those mountains were seriously flawed by brush or brutal
approach. But the look of them from a distance got the blood flowing. The
Matterhorn's flaw was a crowd of similarly-inspired people. As I jogged down to
Trift I consoled myself that if they were inspired by the same pure force that
hit me in that high meadow, then these as-yet-unmet people don't deserve my
grumbling at all. 

For the rest of that happy family trip, we watched the mountain from our
balcony. My step-dad and I wondered aloud about it as we tended the grill and
drank beer. We loved how clouds would obscure the peak, then just as you got
used to the truncated view, a small triangle of summit would hazily appear,
looking impossibly high. That never failed to surprise us.

On our last evening, I took a few hours intending to reach the Hörnli Hütte. I
knew that coming back later I'd be tempted to take the lift to the Schwarzsee,
saving 1000 meters of elevation gain. So I wanted to hike that terrain at least
once. But it was a sobering trip. Above the Schwarzsee I came to deep
snowfields on the main ridge. The trail was completely buried. Then I was
kicking steps around ribs and climbing rotten snow even as avalanches rumbled
on the glacier to my right. I realized that I'd be coming back down in the
dark, and the snow conditions were terrible, causing me to move very slowly. So
I turned around 400 meters below the hut. But I wasn't disappointed. I'd had
the whole area to myself and the mystery of the hut would wait for next time.

# A concrete plan!

A few weeks later, Theron and Carlos came out to visit. We climbed and hiked in
the Dolomites, having a great time in spite of unsettled weather. Near the end
of July, Theron had a few more days so we resolved to climb something from
Zermatt or Grindelwald. After lots of worrying about the weather we chose
Zermatt. I drove down Friday after work and had a great night's sleep in the
Randa parking lot. Saturday we rented gear for Theron, bought some food and
starting the hike from Schwarzsee in surprisingly good weather given the
forecast. It looked like Sunday would be bad, but ``summer-like weather'' (the
forecast actually used this term!) would arrive Monday for a few days. Maybe
we'd wait a day at the hut, we had the time.

Joking and talking as usual we hiked slowly up. My pack felt heavy because I'd
brought my bulkiest Gore-Tex jacket and fleece, along with an extra shirt and
long underwear. Clearly, I'd been spooked by the forecast and memories of how
cold it can get. We had a light 50 meter rope, plenty of slings and a few nuts. 

The woman who checked us in at the hut had a sassy sense of humor. She said
Theron was talking "bullshit" when he said he left his Alpine Club membership
in the car. Then I asked to buy some water and she said no. "Yes!" I said.
"Okay, yes," she said. She also wanted me to only speak German because I live
in Germany. I liked her, but Theron felt a little put out!

We went for a recon hike on the lower part of the ridge. I had a hard time
reading the many paragraphs about the route in guidebooks. There are too many
details, and you are likely to miss half of them hurrying along in the dark.
The only information that seemed worth remembering was that the route is mostly
on the left below the Solvay Hut, then it trends towards the crest after that.
On recon, the mountain reminded us both of the Nortwest Arete on Mount Sir
Donald in British Columbia. Kind of a jigsaw puzzle in the lower flanks, where
it's easy to lose touch with the ridge crest. The comparison is eventually
flawed though, because there is more "walking" terrain on the Matterhorn,
especially approaching the Moseley Slabs at the Solvay Hut. Eventually we felt
satisfied and returned to conserve energy. I was fighting a cold too, and
wanted to get to bed for some more healing time.


The hut was packed. Dinner was pretty good too. There was a party of Americans,
and they convinced us to indeed get up at 3 am with everyone else. We were
thinking of hanging around until dawn, apparently that can be a good strategy
for crowd control. But confidence to buck the system was low. Climbing without
a guide felt faintly scandalous in the hut environment. A newspaper article was
pasted up listing many deaths in a short span. Someone pointed out that no one
ever died with a guide, "it's all the guideless climbers. They get lost, they
are too slow." Everyone we talked to seemed to think going it alone would be
very foolish indeed. I think there were a few others, but the vast majority had
guides. We toasted our Japanese table-mates and went to bed.

Apparently I snored, and 3 times just after I fell asleep my French bed-mate
poked me awake. Finally I gave him ear plugs in exchange for leaving me alone.
"Do you have more for my friend?" he asked in the midnight-black room. As a
matter of fact I did. So finally even I, the snorer, could sleep. It's never
fun to start a climb feeling short of sleep. If you find yourself tormented by
snorers like me, the best solution is to bring earplugs...they work you know!

A welter of noise and confusion a few hours later, stumbling down the hall,
fumbling contacts into my eye-sockets. We were served bread, butter and hot
water. It had snowed during the night, and we wondered what lay in store for
us. But others are leaving. Let's go!

An eager journey in the dark, right behind some people, or right ahead of
others. We came to the end of our recon point very quickly. Over-eager, I went
up a steep cliff then had to come back down. Later, we followed some
French-speaking climbers into a hideous gully. Despite serious rockfall they
pressed on. We waited under a ledge then as I was about to enter the danger
zone Theron noticed smarter people coming up below and smartly turning right on
a ledge to get out of the gully. "I think I can traverse over there," he said.
"Thank god," I muttered as I followed and heard more rockfall and yelling
behind me. 

This is something Theron is really good at. He is patient early in the climb
when I'm over-eager to put ground below me. By keeping his eyes open, he'd
saved us time and more importantly, possibly a climb-ending injury. 

So we followed this smart group (guides are nice after all!) for a good while
on or near the crest where the rock was pretty good. It started to get light
and we eventually passed, but there were always more groups ahead. Eventually
we settled into our place in line for a while, and my impressions of the climb
in here have more to do with the nature of the guides and clients around us
than the mountain. I felt bad for a Japanese man who couldn't understand an
instruction from his guide to keep the rope behind a flake of rock as he
climbed past. The guide was exasperated, and lectured his smiling client like a
child. Later, a guide ordered a Japanese woman to climb, and she responded
immediately, only not in the right place. She lost balance and started to fall
down the slab. I was right there so I gave her a push on the butt and she got
up. It was all kind of funny. What a mix of motivations, misunderstandings and
desires we all are together!

But on the whole, the groups moved fast for the conditions, in my opinion. I
had to respect both the guides and their clients, who moved along well. We put
on crampons several hundred meters below the Solvay Hut, and wouldn't take them
off until late in the day. Judging from pictures I've seen, we had very snowy
conditions. 

At the Moseley Slabs, things really slowed down. Clients scraped their feet
uselessly, and generally made it look pretty scary. Theron led this pitch very
nicely when it was finally our turn. We'd reached the hut and looked inside to
see people eating. We decided to keep going immediately and stop for food
higher up. It was 8 am, we'd been on the go for almost 4 hours. "You are too
slow, you should turn back," said a guide nearby. He was breaking the news to
his clients that they were turning back here. They looked at us heartbroken, so
he had to really pour it on for them: "These people going up will be coming
back in the dark. It is unsafe. We go down now."

I couldn't believe it would be as bad as all that. I did ask a guide how long
he thought it would take to the summit from here. "For you, three hours." As it
turned out, he was exactly right. "Thanks!" I said, and we started up the steep
upper Moseley Slab. I led this pitch, which I found really fun, though stuffing
my wet gloves into my shirt to pinch some slabby holds was unpleasant! Overall,
our gloves were our most important piece of equipment, as the rock was so snowy
and wet sometimes, that without very good ones, we'd have given up a long time
before.

Above the Solvay Hut, the focus of the climb returned to the mountain. We were
pretty much alone, gradually catching up to the few parties who'd also
continued on. There weren't many. The Americans and their guides had descended
a long time before. The weather was holding fine, and the climbing was
interesting scrambling on enjoyable, solid rock. Theron felt I was a little lax
about threading the rope around horns, and I strove to improve. Anyway, now
there was time to enjoy the climbing and it was fun finding the numerous
chances for natural protection.

By now, we'd seen the whole circus of artificial protection the route is
festooned with. Bolts, pitons, fixed ropes, little corkscrew rings, good old
slings, and steel bars to hook the rope around. I'm tempted to say no one
should fall off this mountain, but I know it happens.

We reached the snowy Shoulder and kicked steps up to the ridge crest. The
altitude was definitely slowing us down by now. We were at 14,000 feet and it
took a long time even to cover "easy" ground because of it. I got a picture of
Theron on a super-scenic blocky segment of ridge crest, with the Obergabelhorn
in the background. The scenery was just mind-boggling in here and we were
loving every minute.

We'd caught up to some other folks, passed them, then ran into more on the
fixed ropes below the summit snow slope. It's too bad they are there, but these
fixed ropes were nice to have. It was so snowy and icy that the 5th class
climbing would have taken another hour without them. I guess because this part
of the mountain is rarely in "optimal" conditions, the powers that be decided
it was smart to fix this area. Part of me is sad to see that, but despite all
of these aids it's still a challenging climb, and we didn't feel in any way
that the ascent had been made too easy for us to enjoy it. But I don't pretend
to be a "mountain hard man" either!

Now we had our last unpleasant "people" encounter. We'd heard about this
problem in the hut but didn't really understand it. The issue is that you are
straining your way up a thick rope and someone else with crampon points in your
face is shimmying down! "Hang on, hang on hang on!" is the typical conversation
in here. Most of the summiters were coming down, and there was no such thing as
turn-taking. We waited a bit, somewhat intimidated by the sharp crampons of the
descenders, but finally realized we'd have to muscle our way through to get
anywhere. I remember taking the rope, shouting "I'm coming up!" and generally
being an annoying person in order to get a turn on the ropes for us. The
"pitches" were only about 20 feet long, so I could usually power up quickly
before my heart started pounding too hard.

Whew. Now for the somewhat intimidating final climb. After the fixed ropes we
felt "naked" on this high roof of the world. We kicked steps in the snow
carefully and sometimes found a metal bar to wrap the rope around. We passed a
statue of Saint Benedict (?) right below the summit, and tiredly (for me
anyway) climbed to the high level ridge that marks the Swiss summit. Wow. It
had been a big climb. Normally we shake hands heartily. This time Theron gave
me a big ol' hug. "Congratulations man!"


Theron never got the video camera out until now, and we finally used it. In the
7 or 8 hours of climbing it took to get here, we were too busy all the time.
Later, I read some books and felt embarrassed about our time, which was almost
double what it should take. But what can I say? I don't know to what percentage
acclimatization, crowding and lots of snow contributed, but they were all
factors. We'd been passed by about 12 summiters, so we calculated that out of
maybe 50 climbers, 28% (including us) made it to the summit.

# Getting down

The view was amazing of course. We didn't bother with the lower Italian summit
just a short walk away. After only a few minutes of joy we were thinking about
the long descent. Books tell us that the way down usually takes longer than the
way up. And of course we both have the tragic story of the first ascent burned
into our heads -- the slip by a tired, uncertain climber, pulling three other
people off the mountain to their doom. It was only 11:15 am when we started
down, and the weather was still fine. Safety was the important thing since we
still had 10 hours of daylight.

Theron led down the snow carefully, then the fixed ropes. Below the shoulder, I
went first. Here we met a party of really nice Romanian people. They were
making rappels. We did two, but then realized we need to keep down-climbing
because it's (paradoxically) faster. Now we descended the really solid
ridge-crest rock I remembered enjoying so much on the way up. After another
eternity, we made one more rappel down the upper Moseley Slab to the Solvay
Hut.

We went inside and ate some sausage and cookies. It's kind of a grim hut
though. It would be awful to get stuck up there in a snowstorm. Shudder!

Another rappel, then lots and lots of down-climbing. Finally we could take off
our crampons. Lots of snow had melted since the morning, though it was still
wet and slippery, we had to be careful.

At one point we got lost, and traversed back and forth across a rubble slope
looking for the way. As usual, once we found it we couldn't understand how we'd
lost it or why we'd been so sure on our wrong-way-path!

Somewhere around 6 pm we felt like we were down, and gave ourselves a nice rest
on the ridge crest, looking down at the hut and a cloud over Zermatt. But then
we got mixed up again and wasted 45 minutes trying to get back on track.
Finally rappels from slings left by similarly bewildered people got us near the
right way again. Definitely tired now, I was just mad because dinner is served
at 7, and I doubted they'd let us eat if we arrived at 7:30.

We got down, and only a few minutes in the even-more-packed hut convinced us to
leave. We gathered our things and consumed a liter of beer and a liter of water
while we repacked outside the hut. The beer was surprisingly good, and somehow
really woke us up for the hike down. We had a good time talking with a friend
of the Romanians, still high up on the mountain. "The guides always turn their
clients around at the Solvay Hut. They want to make the lift down for coffee!"
he griped. In the hut, all eyes seemed to be on us, perhaps wondering what
conditions we'd had. But nobody asked, so we said goodbye to our Romanian
friend and hiked down. We were both surprisingly energetic after the 15 hour
climb (7 hours up, 8 hours down!).

We reached the Schwarzsee Hut and were so happy they had a room and some
dinner. I did not want to pound down to reach a shut-up-for-the-night Zermatt!
Dinner was amazingly good, and after a scalding hot shower I collapsed utterly
spent and happy.

So! Was it worth the crowds? Definitely yes. Though they were a big part of the
experience below the Solvay Hut, they couldn't destroy the feeling that it's an
honor to climb this very special mountain. One feeling I have, which is
uncommon for me, is that I'd like to do it again. I think there is so much to
take in that my brain would like another scan through.

Thanks to my boon companion Theron. Thanks to the weather for not hosing us
too!


