---
title: Friederspitz Hiking
date: 2008-11-30
category:
  - hiking
layout: post
location:
  - Friederspitz
elevation: 1200
---

### Friederspitz hike
_November 30, 2008_

With my snowshoes on my back I headed up dirt roads near the town of Gries,
making for the Prince Regenten Steig (path) on Friederspitz. Losing some time
down by the river because of confusion over which junction to take, I did
eventually reach the trail, which climbed steeply. Smallish amounts of snow
were no problem, and there were some old tracks on this mostly south facing
slope. Eventually the trail traversed a steep hillside for about half a mile.
This bugged me because my map showed the trail going straight up the ridge. I
was afraid I was following a hunters path back into a valley. A beautiful
looking valley, but I wanted a summit! I retraced my steps, finally concluding
the traverse was necessary. Later, in a proper guidebook I saw the traverse is
correct.

Anyway, with improving views of the Zugspitze, and "deep looks" down the
valley, I reached a few switchbacks and started climbing up. I thought I was
reaching the ridgecrest when the forest opened up a bit, putting on my
snowshoes for powdery snow. It was too soon! I took them off again, finding it
more efficient to keep using an old boot track until it gave up and went home.
Now in snowshoes, I followed an obvious line to the ridge, then a long walk on
a grassy plateau. I descended slightly, then snowshoed up the long final haul
to the summit of Friederspitz in biting wind. Whew! It took 3 hours and 15
minutes to climb 1200 meters! 40 minutes screwing around on the flats, then
another 15 wasted on the traverse, I guess that is the way it goes. The views
were amazing. I saw Scheinbergspitze and Kramerspitze, other Ammergau hiking
peaks I'd been on previously. The summit of Frieder (as opposed to
Friederspitz!) looked too far away for me to visit and get back sometime around
the noon hour. I'd have to hurry as it was!

Going down was more complex than I expected. I love loop hikes, and planned to
go down "the easy way," which I was sure would be tracked...this being Europe
and all. But no sign! Orienting the map, I picked a valley to descend,
occasionally fighting patches of small trees that would spring up from under
the snow. But I was on the right track, reaching the Friederalmh√ºtte right
where I expected it. A long rightward traverse, then I had to gamble and pick a
place to descend. How about...here. Down steep treed slopes, sometimes
glissading. I chose well, eventually meeting the tracks of a hiker who got
discouraged with the deep snow. Not too worried now, I kept that trail
somewhere in sight and just bombed down through the trees. This would be great
tree skiing, I think.

A long walk out on snowy dirt roads followed. I started jogging awkwardly,
hoping to hurry home. I got home at 1:30 pm, a pretty long "Dawn Patrol"
considering I left at 5:45 am!

Apologies for the length of this little report, I'm writing it the same day,
that is why!

