---
title: Monster Karwendel Hike
date: 2019-7-6
blurb: with Uli and Christiane
layout: post
location:
---

It was the darkest time of night. 3 am. My stomach warm from Uli's peppermint
tea. My nose full of the warm smell of me, emerging from my pillow, which was
only my shoes. Christiane and Uli were there. I was safe enough to drop into
sleep (snoring loudly, they told me later with a grin in the dark, known only
by the uplift in the voice that betrays a smile). It's time to walk again.

We'd been carried to this point on Uli's vision: walk from Lengries to
Scharnitz. From Isar to Isar, but not by the way of water, instead crawling a
path that only a passionate lover of the mountains could craft. Fingers
skirting over the shoulder of the X, and down her neck to Vorderiss. Along the
back of her spine to Hinteriss, patient for now. And then lower yet higher,
guided by water to the heights. To the bells of the Ahornboden and faces of the
animals regarding us in the dawn. Along her hips, and down her legs, down the
generous valley, to the other Isar: the one that lies across pain and beauty.
The end of a road.

He dreams big. He enticed his girl, which bodes well for him, and sank a hook
in me as well. I am old and complacent. Worse, I like myself anyway. So I'm
incorrigible. Still, I found I couldn't sleep the night before. It's the old
excitement. The lover's thrill. The dark valleys and narrow passes. Where are
we going?

My own girl, who knows who she is, was content to send me away with a few
gifts. Food and Ibuprufen, perscription-strength. She is lovely.

We took the train to Lenggries, then walked along the Isar. Christiane and I
were soon deep in highly technical conversation about the mechanics of that
least mechanical thing: The Knowing of what you are. Awakening. How it might be
found or lost. The many cul-de-sacs and errors on the Path. But the joy of the
search. It is another Mountain. Inside, she sits on her haunches, waiting for
you.

Uli, who I suspect knows all of this, walked beside us, feeling the sun on his
right side and the possibility of cool water on his left.

We swam in the Jachen. Overcoming my fear of cold water only because of the
scale of our untertaking, I revelled in the joy of water and vulnerability. I
had a "I don't care," feeling. Refusing to think about how we'd possibly
achieve our goal, I just enjoyed.

Refreshed, we climbed into a side valley I'm reluctant to name because it felt
like a secret. The rivers here are allowed to oxbow and be what they are. The
houses have no paths. They sit in the abundance of the meadow like secrets. It
began to rain, first with the delicious smell of it and later the fat drops
which mark the natural end of a summer day. Back in the main valley, now
evening, Uli made us walk back a whole kilometer because he was allergic to the
main road. To hear him describe it, it would have been as ugly as a Los Angeles
freeway! "The cars, they go fast. And there is no room to walk," he said,
stony-faced.

Clearly, we were travelling with an artist. And we must obey the rules of art.
What we do must have a logic, and a secret. Keeping it, we backtracked to
wooded ways and silent forests.

Later, we watched the sun going down from a bench in the valley. "I never saw
an adult drink a 'Capri Sun,'" remarked Christiane, to which Uli nodded
seriously. But it was a gift from my girl, stolen as I later found out, from
her son. It was delicious! Uli produced a tiny vial of salt and applied it
studiously to an enormous cucumber. He also shared a strange purple carrot,
which I, ever phobic of vegetables and their hideous life, had to admit was
pretty good. Christiane took pictures with an impressive camera and showed off
her new compression socks. Somehow, she looked more qualified and professional
in them, blue and black, snaking up to her knees like sleek riding boots. We
set off again, arguing about electronic currencies -- a force for good or ill?

Darkness found us at the Rißsattel, surrounded by fireflies, proud that we'd
avoided our headlamps. The place felt oddly magical. The view down to
Vorderriss and out into blue shapes of the Karwendel contained the seed of a
dark drama: who would we be when next the light returned? Carefully down the
steep trail we descended, running into two young men in the middle of the
slope. I sped by saying little, only noting that they kept bumping into each
other and saying "oof!" like cartoon characters. Strangely, it didn't occur to
me that they were drunk out of their minds. Christiane and Uli told me later
about a strange rambling conversation with the benighted pair, who ended by
resolving to turn and follow us deep into the Karwendel.

They even did, at least for a while. As we sat with our feet in the Isar we saw
their headlamps stumbling and jerking down the steep trail above. Fools and
children are protected, they say!

We joked about taking the subway into Vorderriss proper, but decided to stay in
the outskirts because of crowds, even though the bar was closed. I'd been
secretly hoping for a beer to make the walk to Hinteriss more pleasant, but the
town was dead to the world.

I set off first alone, wanting to commune with the trees and the silent night.
I listened to "Valtari," an album that deeply affected me. The fireflies kept
me company, and the trees nodded and bowed. One day we will know each other, it
is clear! They wait only for me to slow down.

The great bulk of peaks came into my life slowly, and departed just as slowly.
Like so many things, they fill the sky and one day are gone.

I was in a heaven, where truth swirled amid distant lightning flashes and low,
wispy clouds. I felt my companions behind me. I felt the mystery ahead. I felt
the little bit of warmth and goodness that I had, and how bright it all is
alone in the dark.

If I make myself smaller, I receive more of the world. Folded into the great
stone and architecture of the Karwendel, I was an ant on a hopeless mission. My
mission is hopeless still.

Awesome.

----

Discomfort rears his wooly head. I lay curled up on the only dry patch of
ground I could find: the bare street. Uli looms in the darkness like a
quizzical bear, with Christiane following crisply behind. They adopt my napping
space, and I set off alone again, eager for more conversation with the trees.
Amazingly, a car drove down the valley at 2 am. "They must be a murderer," I
quipped, forgetting that if anyone out here is crazy, it's us!

In Hinterriss, I again slept on the street, but Uli discovered that the Visitor
Center had a friendly and wind-protected upper entrance. Christiane started a
pot of tea, announcing that she decided to stop here. Thinking of the warm and
dry Inn across the street I realized that if they were open somehow I would
stop immediately. "I have nothing to prove!" she said with an open smile. This
is a deeply good thing, I thought. I'm carrying around a bundle of "I.O.U."'s
to myself, a whole ledger-book full of notions that I want to live up too. How
can I drop this thinking? "By simply dropping it," Christiane's smile seems to
say.

We fell into slumber roughly together, though I snored within seconds of my
head landing on my "pillow." It was a delicious nap. I dreamed, but now I only
remember waves of energy cascading under my eyelids like ripples of sand on a
beach. We left Christiane here with some food to keep her company until the
hiker's bus in the morning. Uli carried a part of her forward, and she kept a
piece of him at her side. This is understood. It is how we do it on this
planet.

Marching like marionettes to warm up stiff muscles, we walked up the road, then
to a forest road and finally trail, we were entering the Johannestal. I turned
my headlamp to it's brightest setting, making our forest trail burn an
iridescent green that was oddly magical.

Here I experienced a curious bifurcation of consciousness. I'd been up this
valley once before, in a snowy November, walking the road tiredly with Mat and
Ari. I became impatient and exhausted with the road, and the emotional state
from that long ago day colored my thoughts. Nearby were worse thoughts, of
guilt and recrimination. I'd fallen from the "Dorethea Wallner Gedächnis" route
in the Wetterstein, and Mat caught my wrenching fall, tearing his ACL and
leaving an angry scar from the rope across his neck. I'd seen my children
before me in the fall and I'd felt incredible sadness as time stopped. I'd seen
the piton rip out and the world turn upside down as I flipped over. "Too bad it
ends this way," was my distinct thought.

It changed my life. Now I can say for the better. But for a long time it was
just the introduction of a false note in a beautiful, simple chord.

I saw now why I was so cross 15 years ago walking the road. I'd been given a
gift that I wished I could return. But when I say "I saw now," that isn't quite
right. I only see it when writing this. In the pre-dawn with Uli, I only
experienced anew those feelings. And I was resentful, angry and miserable.

And now my feet were burning, and there were too many miles to go. I sat in the
bath of the consciousness I'd made for myself and found nothing good. I fell
behind and dragged along. I resented Uli his health, and imagined that he paid
nothing for it. "I think maybe I should return to Hinterriss," I said. Uli
regarded me levelly. We both knew there was nothing to do but decided to go on
or to return. And that this was a personal choice. I'd found a border in me.

I bumped along the wall of this border, black and smelling of industrial
chemicals, pock-marked by unheard parts of me, who'd been maintaining this
wall, left uncared for and unsupervised. I was at a real low point.

--------

However, I kept walking, because my options were so simple. Sit and hope to get
stronger, go back, or go forward. After I suggested going back I realized I'd
much rather suffer and keep going. The drama of the steep valley walls and the
growing light lifted my spirits a bit. Maybe this previous version of me, full
of dark thoughts, was no more real than the wispy clouds now lifting from the
valley floor. I can and will go on, because what lies ahead is more interesting
than what lies behind. And for now I can still move my legs. With Uli far ahead
as a guide, I plodded up the long street, past the homey X Huette, lit from
within by golden light. Soon the wall of gray peaks loomed above and the bells
of many cows marked the Kleine Ahornboden. Uli was resting on the wooden porch
of a cabin. I joined him, sitting stupidly and searching for the energy to move
uphill to the Karwendelhaus.

We set off, Uli again moving far ahead. I accepted that I'd lost my strength
and had to move slowly. Big deal. However, there was a line of cows on the
narrow trail between Latschen bushes, and separately Uli and I both had little
dramas trying to get around them, or coax them to move just a little higher so
we could pass. Forced to trot at one point, my heart hammering in my chest, I
just managed to pass a cluster of cows who mixed resentful forward movement
with long pauses to swivel their heads and stare at me. Eventually I got to a
fence beyond which they couldn't pass and so I was free.

Then a cold and heavy rain started. My umbrella was useful, but by the time I
reached the Karwendelhaus, my legs were frozen and shoes were sopping wet.
Inside, I found Uli sitting with a breakfasting group in the packed and warm
house. A somewhat awe-struck woman said she was leaving and left a place for
me. (Later I found out why. She'd asked Uli where he started. He turned to her
and rasped: Lenggries, delivering a palpable shock. She must have felt newly
surrounded by people who look normal but are deep into madness!)

We sat and drank coffee, gradually feeling human again. Mindful of the blisters
on my feet, and aware that the wet socks were about to cause many more, I got
my feet dry and wrapped the poor things tenderly in my jacket. This temporary
respite of a warm, dry home really saved me from much worse pains I'm sure.

Continued injections of coffee, milk, sugar and finally cake as the crowds
gradually left their breakfast made us feel ready to move again. I'd suggested
spending the night and using a vacation day Monday, but now fully warm and
rested this again seemed like an overreaction. I really am easily unsettled by
discomfort!

We set out, walking down a mix of road and trail under a cloudy sky. At least
it wasn't raining, and views gradually increased down-valley. In fact, this
valley (Karwendeltal) impressed me deeply. Always an amazing multi-tiered
waterfall. Or an interesting array of caves high in a rock wall surrounded by
vertiginous green slopes. The highest peaks looked impossibly far above, almost
crystalline...protected by interlocking buttresses and ramparts. And the scale
was enormous. Our broad and somewhat punishing valley, our never-ending descent
curving gradually from west to south. I would see a side trail leading up one
side or the other and groan aloud, only to imagine walking up it for any
distance.

We stopped on some boulders and ate Uli's dates and chocolate (really amazing
dark chocolate!). He was hoping it would be the last stop, but I hedged my
bets, pretty sure that we still had a long way to go. "One more after this
one!" I said weakly.

Indeed, the lower valley was still beautiful, but the length was wearing on us
both. I said I had to stop at the next bench in the shade, then pitifully lay
on the ground and put my feet up on the bench. I remembered I had an Ibuprofen
tablet from Barbara, and took it. Ach -- suffer time!

We set off again, determined not to stop. This last 1.5 hours was quite tough.
I remember breathing and limping for long periods, seeing only my feet and the
road in front of me.


