---
title: Homeostasis in walking
date: 2022-01-18
layout: post
excerpt: "Walking is not about movement. It is about stillness at a more refined level. The walker is still. The earth moves beneath him."
categories: metaphysics
---

Sick with Covid.

Finally meditating with some regularity.

Second session today.

Golden truth. Breath. Sound.

The riding atop and within.

Mastery.

Balance within the etheric layers.

In the waves of the sounding sun...

It was a year ago I first saw the Spiritual Eye, in yoni
mudra khumbuka. I stopped that practice because I want to see
it always, without special holding of breath. Today was a hint
that I might get there. With the sound of so-ham, both intoned
and listened to, blue light surrounded by yellow...zoomed in,
occasionally forgotten, then rediscovered when the sound is
picked up again. It was there. It is there.

Walking is not about movement.

It is about stillness at a more refined level.

The walker is still. The earth moves beneath him.

It is about the quest for homeostasis at greater intensity.

Just as a helicopter's wings look still when they rotate
quickly, the walker is meditating.

In China, at the time when Dogen brought Zen to Japan, the
monks walked to find truth. They moved over the land in order
to "see" what does *not* move. Each monestary was a monument
of joy to the discovery gained on the roads between. The
golden light falls on the walker who moves not.

I will use my land. In cars as a child, falling asleep.
Awakening again. Peering out. The eternal New Mexican
landscape. The endless day. I turned to my toys, just as
now I turn to my jobs. I abstracted, then returned to
the land. This very land is the place where I will find
no more escape.

The shuttle will leave me at the monument, perhaps with
one or two others. We will move through the land like a
dream half-remembered. It does not matter if we were real.
It only matters that I knew this was required in order
to understand. And that the note is held until close of day.

This day. This life.. It ends when I understand it. And
should I falter, the land itself will sing. Because I did
give it one thing. I gave it what I had. I have loved it
into being, and it will raise me from my deaths until
I can carry it always within me.

As the note that never ceases.
