---
title: The world and you are not different
date: 2022-11-26
layout: post
---

{% image /images/feast-sky.jpg %}
Photo by <a href="https://unsplash.com/@vklemen?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText">Klemen Vrankar</a> on <a href="https://unsplash.com/s/photos/heavens-opening?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText">Unsplash</a>

It hit me in a special way this morning that I am just a door. A door mostly
closed. When I fully open, I will not be necessary anymore. So out of fear of
opening, I keep my foot pressed against it.

What is coming in is the love of God, as felt through the soul. When the soul
comes in, there is no more need for the mind to be the boss. There never was
any need for that, in fact. And the mind is just holding off the day of its
ending.

When the soul comes in, it comes on a tide of love. It will not enter a space
if that space is not already swelling with delight at its arrival. And so, even
as I wish to meet the incoming soul with a banquet, with a love-feast, I see
that many parts of me are not preparing the feast. They are "busy with their
own lives."

If they came to attention, then the feast would begin. Then love would rush in,
and there would be rejoicing in the heavens.

What followed from this knowledge was a surprise.

It is that I am the world.

Or, the world is me. Or just like me.

One on level, the world and I are not the same, of course.

But when it comes to opening the door, it is the same psychological situation.
The world feels itself unready to merge into God. It is busy trying to save the
world. To save itself.

How often do you meet people who are full of a "task." They worry endlessly
about the planet. If you talk about something silly, they look at you sadly and
wonder when you'll grow up. Because they believe that their thoughts are
weighty, and that they somehow help the groaning world.

The truth is, the world is groaning because of their thoughts, in part. This
world need not be as it is. It is "held in place" by thoughts of its reality.

Oh, how often have I been among those people who hold weighty thoughts about
the world? Even a few days ago I was full of lament, and infuriated. I love
those people because I know the desperation with which I thought the same
things as they did. They wander the landscape as hungry, ineffectual ghosts.
They are haunted beings. Haunted by their belief in the world, and their
relative importance in it. They are not looking up, where reality waits
patiently in abeyance.

Reality will not enter uninvited. It is a wedding feast. And the world, like
you, the bride.

