---
title: Nihilism pure
date: 2023-02-13
draft: yes
layout: post
---

It's been a crazy year. In fact, the 2020s have been...strange. I am
certainly a bit too zoomed in on cultural issues (when I should be ignoring
them)...they are a kind of junk food, I think. The last 7 years for
me have been a journey of discovery of how brilliant our ancestors were.
It's not necessary to read anything written after the 2nd world war.
Or, you could say...not after the protestant reformation. So, as I discover
all these great things, I am dismayed at the glee our current culture has
about "deconstructing" (which means destroying) older works and ideas.
When I was less conscious, I half-believed this idea floating in the
air -- that the old was stultifying and oppressive. Now that I have
organized my mind to a much greater degree I say "no, that is much more
of a wrong idea than a right one."

Today, simple Christian faith is considered "bigotry." And we all know what
that means: the bigot must be unpersoned. Or at least "taught." The teaching
will be fear, as it always is when these times come. And fear will require
burnings to be stoked. I'm inclined to look for roots of the problem at times
like this. 

## Nihilism: The Root of the Revolution of the Modern Age

> The spiritual eye in fallen human nature is not sound, as every
> Orthodox Christian knows; we see in this life only dimly and require
> faith and the Grace of God to effect a healing that will enable us, in
> the future life, to see clearly once more. The first stage of Nihilism,
> which is Liberalism, is born of the errors of taking our diseased eye
> for a sound one, of mistaking its impaired vision for a view of the
> true world, and thus of discharging the physician of the soul, the
> Church, whose ministrations are not needed by a "healthy" man. In
> the second stage, Realism, the disease, no longer attended by the
> necessary physician, begins to grow; vision is narrowed; distant
> objects, already obscure enough in the "natural" state of impaired
> vision, become invisible; only the nearest objects are seen distinctly,
> and the patient becomes convinced no others exist. In the third
> stage, Vitalism, infection leads to inflammation; even the nearest
> objects become dim and distorted and there are hallucinations. In
> the fourth stage, the Nihilism of Destruction, blindness ensues and
> the disease spreads to the rest of the body, effecting agony,
> convulsions, and death.


