---
title: Chair Peak North Face
date: 2002-3-2
layout: post
location: Chair Peak
---

Dan and I were going to do something this weekend. My time got
shortened to one day due to long-overdue house chores and some
relatives visiting on Sunday. He had climbed Chair Peak before but
generously agreed to climb it with me. This route has been kind of a
milestone in my mind, and I tried rather crabbily to get some sleep
Friday night. "Kris, can you tell the cat to quit breathing so loud?"
Finally I slept and fuzzily prepared when the alarm when off 35
seconds later.  We took Dan's truck, and Dan had brought Aidan
H. along. I'd met Aidan once before and exchanged emails. It was great
to finally climb with him. I could try to drill into him how lucky he
is to be doing this at age 15!


![Traversing to the base of the route](images/articles/trips/2002/travstart.jpg)

![Dan and Aidan on approach](images/articles/trips/2002/onapproach.jpg)


![Aidan tries the sketchy start](images/articles/trips/2002/aidanlead.jpg)

![Wishing me luck from an airy belay](images/articles/trips/2002/cstpitch3.jpg)


![Aidan and the Tooth](images/articles/trips/2002/aidantop.jpg)


![Dan and Kaleetan Peak](images/articles/trips/2002/dantop.jpg)

![Aidan on rappel](images/articles/trips/2002/aidanrap.jpg)

![Michael on rappel](images/articles/trips/2002/rapgully.jpg)


![Aidan and Dan, then Dan and Michael on the summit](images/articles/trips/2002/summit.jpg)


![Michael on pitch two](images/articles/trips/2002/midpit.jpg)


![Entering the final difficulties](images/articles/trips/2002/lastpit.jpg)


![Dan and Michael at a col below the summit.](images/articles/trips/2002/atcol.jpg)


We geared up and took off. Dan was on skis, Aidan brought skis but
left them, and I brought snowshoes and left them. We hiked up the
valley and Dan skinned up beside us, talking about previous climbs of
Chair. This would be his sixth time on top, so he had all kinds of
stories. Good conditions, bad conditions, witnessing a fall. We passed
the now-anemic Kiddie Cliff ice flow and soon crunched up pre-made
steps above Source Lake. We'd met Alex and Summer in the parking lot,
one of those happy "small world!" moments. There were many cars
parked, so we mentally prepared for the little miseries of
crowding. But moving quickly and easily in the aforementioned tracks,
nothing could dispel our super-positive mood.


Dan left his skis by the Thumb Tack, and we headed up to the ridge. We
gradually entered the "alpine pool" - first an ice axe, then crampons
on the shady side of the ridge. Then helmet and harness - locked and
loaded, four-wheel drive, ready to rock! This is an important stage in
winter climbing. Many times I don't make it out of snowshoe and poles
mode, due to weather, conditions or time. Alex and Summer were
starting the NE Buttress. Surprisingly, no one was on the North Face.
Aidan got a picture of Dan and I traversing up to the bergschrund. Dan
belted out some 1970s "American Rawk" sounding stuff. I tried some
Zeppelin, with little success.  Trying to invoke alpine imagery, I
drew attention to my *piolet ramasse* demonstration and said "Allez!" in
what I thought to be a "french" voice. I tried for grimness, since we
were on a north face after all, but none of us could muster it.


At the bergschrund we went to the rock edge on the right and set up a
belay. I led off. Having dreamed about this climb for a while, I was
determined to make a good show.  Thin ice chunks starting coming off,
exposing rock. Soon I was searching for hook placements on downslabby
rock. I found one and made a delicate move, merely 6 feet from good
snow on the left. I could hook some thin ice above, but I needed some
pro. I fiddled with the pitons, but felt too tenuous to make a serious
effort at finding something. It wasn't supposed to be like this! I
came down: "sorry guys, too hard for me!"


Aidan had been watching and getting inspired. His turn: another
valiant effort, but stymied by the disintegrating ice. Dan went up and
really worked for a piton placement, but they all bottomed out and
would maybe hold a water bottle. Very conscious of passing time, Dan
moved back to the center of the bergschrund and found a much easier
way up, helped by a strategic picket placement. He traversed right on
snow, then entered some very nice ice climbing.  Another party was
right behind, and we apologized for slowing them up. They were a group
of three like us. Dan belayed us both up on the double ropes, and we
were in nirvana on the ice bulges. Moanings and sounds of pleasure
echoed off the face. You would really wonder what we were up to if you
heard that out of context!



Dan belayed from ice screws at the top of the bulge, and sent me up
with instructions to climb up into a shallow gully on the right, clip
a tree further right, and keep going to the highest reasonable tree
belay. Sometimes I had snow good for regular axe placements, and at
other times bulges of ice put me back into piolet traction mode. I
realized one axe would have been enough for this pitch, and probably
would have saved time. The angle was low enough that it seemed I had
too much to fiddle with. Anyway, I placed an ice screw in good ice,
then ran out the rope to a picket while Dan and Aidan prepared to
climb.  Mindful that we were simulclimbing, I moved up and slung a
tree, then kept going on steeper snow to a high tree on the far
right. The moves to sling the tree were somewhat delicate, as my
kicked steps awoke an energetic shrub below the surface, which pushed
up with slick leaves on my feet. I dropped a sling trying to make a
double length runner, but Dan caught it 200 feet below. Aidan was also
new to the north face, and was really enjoying the route.  I was glad
to be at a belay. Earlier in the pitch I sent a chunk of ice raining
down when some brittle ice shattered. This was certainly scary for
everyone below. A bit of seriousness crept into my mood as I thought
about that, and tried to prevent dropping debris again.


We were now a full pitch above the other party, so we took a moment to
eat. Aidan had pepperoni sausage. It seemed to be frozen, but Dan
somehow dissolved half of it with highly acidic saliva. I broke into a
peanut butter sandwich, but didn't see what Aidan ate, since he was
perched right above in an awkward stance. He was going to lead the
last pitch, but decided against it for several reasons - mainly that
it's his first ice climb! I think that was a good decision of the day,
along with Dan deciding not to solo the route beside us (he got a
"wild hair" for a minute). Aidan could easily lead it, but I think
it's important to have that confidence in your mind that "I've seen
something like this before, I've been in a similar situation." And as
for Dan soloing, we just wanted him on the rope with us. Why not,
right?


I'd done a few single pitch WI3 things with Alex, Peter and Steve over
the last year so I felt pretty good about trying it. But I was
apprehensive about running into rock like down at the bergschrund. I
quizzed Dan for a few more piton pointers and traversed left from the
belay. Aidan got a nice picture of me, and I got a good one of them -
perched at this single tree in the middle of frozen hell! I considered
asking them to look worried and emaciated, but Dan merely looked
complacent and happy. We shouldn't have fed him the pepperoni!


I slung a shrub and entered a private world around the corner. Back
onto harder snow and ice, I climbed a shallow gully on the
right. Another shrub provided more protection for the rope and soon I
was at a rock wall where I needed to traverse left to a bulge of
ice. I looked around for a crack in the rock, and immediately saw a
good Knifeblade placement - Yes! I slotted the piton and
hammered. First carefully, then with wild abandon, enjoying the
steadily rising "ping!" tone. Of course, wild abandon on a north face
is more muted than by the ocean. I think it translated to a "flicker
of a smile and a whispered yes!" in reality.


Now I could move carefully left and up. I placed an ice screw at the
base of the bulge, but it wasn't the best. There was good ice, and
then I seemed to punch through into a hole after three inches. Hmm. I
found good placements high, took a few steps up and passed the
bulge. "Nice!" Now I had a steep snow slope all the way to the
corniced ridge. Dan and Aidan starting climbing during this section,
so I placed a picket for safety. Another 60 feet and I was dazed in
the sunshine looking down to Alpental.  Belaying at a tree, I tried to
memorize every step of the climb. I had alternated clips, so Dan was
able to stay further left on the face while Aidan went into the gully
with the piton. I had played a small joke by clipping a quickdraw to a
stout twig above the difficulties. Dan thought "who is he kidding?"
when he cleaned it. Maybe protection can be performance art? I've
heard of an aid climber who glues little plastic toys to key points on
horrible blank faces of rock. So a Greedo action figure might signal
that it's time to begin hooking on crumbly ledges, and Darth Vader is
at the belay station. The "comical twig" is my entry into that dubious
art.


We left the ropes and walked to the summit, amazed by the "Tetony"
view all around. I used to think of Snoqualmie Pass as fairly
gentle. I think it's because of a pencil drawing in the Beckey Bible
which makes the ridge from the Tooth to Chair look like a class 2-3
scramble. But everything was vertical, and every snowy couloir held
promise of adventure. A crazy Alaskan ridge to the Footstool, an
unknown summit left of Kaleetan, the half-imagined New York Gully
across the valley. There was no wind, and the sun was warm so we were
encouraged to linger. We discussed the degree to which the climb had
rocked our faces off. The degree was at a minimum, extreme. I worried
about what Kris would think when I returned home, my visage a mass of
sinew and tissue, due to the sloughing off of the skin caused by the
unnatural excellence of the climbing!


We all knew when to head down, and quickly descended to our gear. The
party below had set up a belay above the last ice bulge and seemed to
be having fun. Alex and Summer had been up here but we had missed
them. We climbed down a mushy-icy-mushy gully to a col with a rap
station. A single rope rappel got us into a gully above the large bowl
with the Thumb Tack. The down-climbing was a little tricky from that
point. First Dan deftly passed us, then Aidan invented a cool
technique, and I followed, impatient with my slow, facing-in
technique. Finally we could plunge step and glissade for a while,
until the snow became a crust over avalanche debris, and we wallowed
the rest of the way.


Dan set up his skis and Aidan and I walked down. We had a few nice
glissades above Source Lake, but a lot of plodding along too. Aidan
told me about his climb of the Stuart Glacier Couloir last year, which
was a huge day. We talked about the cascadeclimbers web site, and what
a great resource it is (no kidding!). We beat Dan back to the truck,
and he said the skiing had been pretty difficult. I love it when a
skier says that, I feel ok not knowing how to ski. These moments are
fleeting though, and they seem very far away when I plod down a snowy
logging road, my companions already drinking beer and laughing at the
car!


So naturally, we repaired to the North Bend QFC for fried chicken. I
rounded this out with a corn dog and a chocolate milk. We sat on the
tailgate and stared at the sun, feeling free like birds, as they say.


Thanks Aidan and Dan!


