---
title: Liberty Bell, Liberty Crack
date: 2002-6-20
blurb: rained out
layout: post
---

* Liberty Crack (A3, 5.9)
* June, 2002

Dan 
and I drove up Saturday night, slept by the truck, and got an
early start Sunday on Liberty Crack. Fumbling around in the dark
forest, we eventually made our way to snowfields below the wall. It
was very impressive! I'd never aid climbed more than two pitches, so
the wall had an air of seriousness. I was reminded than one shouldn't
look at such blank faces for very long, lest intimidation set in!

![The golden face on the morning of our climb (by P. Chapman)](images/lbgpeter.jpg)
![Michael following the first pitch (my first Jumaring experience!)](images/jumarit.jpg)
![The camera died just before the good part of the roof!](images/meroof.jpg)
![Dan pining for Rachel](images/danlove.jpg)
![Sigh, our high point looking down](images/highpt.jpg)

We brought one pack, which Dan had rigged for hauling. We had to stuff
in rock shoes, food, water, and an ice axe for the
descent. Teeter-tottering on the edge of the snowfield, we awkwardly
got our gear together, and scrambled up a ways to set a belay in the
rock. Dan took the first lead, having to traverse right to enter the
crack, and finding difficult moves right from the start. "This is
definitely A3!" he said. He overcame various conundrums with fiddling,
nerves and luck. I was eager to get off the ground and join Dan on the
wall.


Soon enough, he reached a bolted belay station just below the great
roof, the "Lithuanian Lip" named for Alex Bertulius. It was my lead,
and I nervously prepared to climb. I'd never climbed such a huge
overhang before, and the increasing clouds and (yes) snow flurries
added to the commitment. The great void of air beneath us seemed to
pull at me as I moved up to a sling and then a bolt near the roof. I
found a hole that would hold a Yellow Alien, tested it, then shifted
my weight onto the piece. I remember looking down at Dan as I twisted
in the air. He was wearing his black down jacket, which became
speckled with snowflakes. Another move brought me to a titanium piton
at the edge of the roof. Then I had some difficulties escaping back
onto the steep face.  I didn't have any gear that would fit in the
very thin crack. "Remember the hooks!" said Dan. Oh yes. These "hooks"
are not traditional rock protection in the sense that you put them in
the rock and they stay there. Oh no. A hook is merely a piece of metal
that sits on a lip of rock as long as your weight is on it. It will
casually fall off without the stabilizing weight.  Of course,
microscopic variations in the shape of the platform you are trusting
could also cause the hook to fly off before your horrified eyes!


But one does what one must. In fact, I felt quite secure with the
variation of hook I had selected - a Leeper Cam hook. A few hooks and
placements later, I heaved above the abyss. Dan saw my feet disappear
over the lip and then knew me only by the slow movement of the rope.


At the end of the pitch I felt like I'd been climbing for hours. I
clipped into sturdy bolts, and set up a hauling system with my
ascenders for the pack with gear and water. As I hauled, I looked
around amazed by this new vertical world, and my excitement grew. My
meager free climbing abilities had never allowed me to enter this
environment of hold-less walls. Nevertheless, I felt the same kind of
satisfaction at the end of the pitch. The moments of pride came from
the occasional gamble (heart in throat) on insecure hooks, or
particularly "intelligent" placements. The snow stopped and the
weather seemed to clear a bit as Dan efficiently jumared the fixed
line.


Pitch three belonged to Dan, and we were both excited about it. It is
infamous for it's insecure gear placements and ratty-looking fixed
gear hammered frantically into the rock. A particular kind of aid
climbing gear called a "copperhead" is made of soft metal that must be
"pasted" with a hammer into a shallow seam of rock.  When placed, it
looks like a silver piece of gum, and holds a little bit better than
the gum might. Occasionally a too-heavily-laden person attempts to
climb the route and rips a copperhead out. We didn't have any with us,
so if it wasn't in place, we were done for the day.


Dan moved quickly up. He's a pretty experienced aid climber, and had
suggested that he lead the 4 aid pitches, then we swap leads on the
rest of the climb. I had hemmed and hawed about this idea, somewhat
worried than some free pitches might prove too difficult for me, and I
would end up feeling short of leads at the end of the day. On the
other hand, if I proved to be a slow aid climber, I could ruin our
chances by causing us to wallow on the lower pitches for too long. My
only aid experience consisted of enjoyable mornings or afternoons with
Peter Chapman at Index.  On this day I moved as quickly as I could,
and I think it met Dan's threshold for reasonable speed.


As he climbed, Dan remarked on the relative mankiness of the
gear. Eventually he had to make two hook placements in a row. I braced
for the impact! But he moved through with no problems and shouted "Off
belay!" As I jumared past and cleaned the gear, I was amazed by the
museum of metal scraps he had clipped to. In one case, the rock seemed
to have grown around a blob of metal with a frayed cable to clip to!
"Nice lead, Dan!" I marveled, happy to rely on his ingenuity to end
up perched beside him.


Pitch 4 is sometimes climbed free at 5.10, but I aided it. This went
quickly, as the angle was not as steep and I could reach very high for
placements. We only used two aiders instead of three or four, so high
steps were kind of awkward on the harder pitches.


As we began putting the aid climbing gear away and getting out the
rock shoes, we had to confront something we'd been putting off -- the
weather. The clouds swirled around us, spitting occasional rain. The
rock had the greasy feeling it gets when damp but not soaked. We
looked up at the chimneys and cracks that disappeared in the mist, and
reflected that we didn't have the promise of better weather in the
forecast. There was little fuel for the optimist. My best endorsement
was a rather lame "I'll go on if you want to." Dan certainly did, and
began climbing in rock shoes. "S*#! this is hard," he said, feet
skittering on the greasy slabs.  Now we were of one mind: it was a
great aid climbing half-day, let's go down.


The rappels went quickly, only gaining some complication just above
the ground.  Dan made a single rope rappel, but ended up stranded
above the moat on slabs.  I re-rigged for a double rope rappel, and we
easily reached our starting point.  Sigh. On the ground, looking up at
the wall and our high point. Our greatest fear now was that the sun
would come out.


But the gods showed kindness. We drove slowly away to the west where
clouds stacked and wept. In the coming days I'd hatch crazy schemes to
return during the week, breathing noisily into the phone on calls to
Dan, but work and other concerns prevented it. Next year!


By the way, Peter and Kim Chapman were on Silver Star, and got a nice
picture of Liberty Bell. I've looked for little specks on the wall,
but either I can't see that well or our presence was a ghostly
one. Our two parties wondered about each other during the day.


