---
title: Bernadeinwand (Attempt)
date: 2009-6-15
layout: post
category:
  - climbing
guests:
  - Garon
location:
  - Bernadeinkopf
elevation: 400
---

### Bernadeinwand attempt
_June, 2009_

<a href="https://www.summitpost.org/user_page.php?user_id=22352">Garon Coriz</a>
and I tried to climb the Direct North Face of the Bernadeinwand on Saturday
morning. At the car it seemed like it wasn't actively raining. But once at the
rock it was black with water, and then it started to rain. We went up anyway out
of sheer stubbornness. The first pitch chimney was like climbing in a shower. It
was very unpleasant to have streams of water going down my jacket to my chest!
We went three more pitches, but on the last one I took a wrong turn (rather,
failed to traverse hard left) and ended up at an unknown belay station. It had
been a bit tough to reach it too on the wet, black rock. Garon came up and
looked to the left for the proper station. He didn't see anything promising.

Looking up, I imagined we _could_ climb this variation. I saw some bolts and the
next belay station. But I didn't know if it would connect again with our route
and might get really hard. We only had one 50 meter rope, and I didn't want to
have to retreat from high up. So we rappelled down to an intermediate anchor and
I went left in search of the belay. Found it. But by this time, the rain had
picked up even more, it was getting awfully late for a "morning trip" (I didn't
have the whole day), and a series of moves off the belay were quite burly given
the conditions. So we decided to go down.

What a hassle! I tried rapping straight down, but I didn't have enough rope to
reach any kind of anchor or place to build one. So we resorted to belayed
climbing back right across the traverse. Then we could connect bolts or pitons
the rest of the way down, having to leave 2 carabiners. Sigh!

Oh well, it was a nice learning experience. In general, if the rock difficulty
stays below 5.6 or 5.7, you can climb in even heavy rain. But 5.7 climbing often
requires enough friction to make slick rock dangerous. Better luck next time!
