---
title: Schrankogel (attempt)
date: 2009-3-10
layout: post
category:
  - skiing
guests:
  - Dan
location:
  - Schrankogel
elevation: 1500
---

### Schrankogel (attempt)
_March, 2009_

Dan P. and I meant to ski to the Schrankogel in the Stubai Alps, via the
Franz-Senn Huette. I knew it would be a long way, because the guidebook
suggested it would take 3 hours to reach the Franz-Senn Huette, then 5 more
hours to reach the summit. But we felt strong! We left the car at Seduk a bit
after 8 am, and reached the Franz-Senn-HÃ¼tte in 2 hours and 15 minutes. I had
some trouble with my new ski/skin combination: Silas Wild's old pink skins
don't like to grip on icy trails. Once I fell off of a switchback and had a
tough time righting myself. Oh well, eventually I got past this spot and the
skins seemed to work better for the rest of the day.

Over a piece of pie at the Hut we thought about our options. Should we climb
something closer? I felt like 5 more hours of powering up the mountains would
leave me pretty wasted, but Dan was game and I was willing, so we took off up
the long valley to the glacier.

After a long, tiring ascent we met some Czech guys near the turn off to the
Wildgratscharte, a narrow pass we needed to climb through in order to drop onto
another glacier and reach the Schrankogel. We looked at their map for
confirmation, then headed up to the pass. We had to boot the final 100 feet to
the pass, where we ran into a large group of French Army troops, learning
mountain skills. They were very nice. 

We saw the considerable distance still to reach the Schrankogel, and realized
that I had no crampons and Dan had no headlamp. Those facts, combined with how
tired I felt at this point led me to suggest going back. I was also hoping to
get to enjoy the good powder snow before it froze up or got too heavy. So we
turned back.

The ski down was great fun, but marred slightly by a really long flat section
on the valley floor near the hut. Tiring! We reached the car around 4 pm, just
as the weather got to it's very best: blue sky and sun.

18 miles round trip, 5600 feet elevation gain/loss.
