---
title: Doss dela Torta Hike
date: 2009-5-20
layout: post
category:
  - hiking
location:
  - Doss dela Torta
elevation: 1200
---

### Doss dela Torta
_May, 2009_

ehile vacationing at the Garda Lake with the family, I took our last full
afternoon for a solo hike. I could see an alpine crest northwest of Riva, and my
map just covered the area. Driving to the pretty Lago di Tenno, I parked the car
at the trailhead by the village of Ballino. Heading up trail 420 to the west, it
wasn't long before I was out of the cool forest and on a broiling dirt road
climbing the mountainside in long switchbacks. I was making for a mountain
called Doss dela Torta. Finally the road ended and I traversed trail into a
gully to find a big surprise: a massive avalanche had occurred here, maybe even
1-2 years ago, but the snow was still here, well protected under a layer of
forest debries. The snow was about 10 feet thick at the most, it descended
another 200 feet down below, and far above in the gully as well. I spent a few
minutes climbing on then crossing the thing. Very strange! The next gully
provided me with some water.

Many forested switchbacks got me up to alpine country, then a nice alpine hut
with an open winterroom (called Nardis). Now in snow, I traversed southwest into
a basin below Doss dela Torta. I finally decided to climb straight up the slope,
which was fine, then I dealt with a pitch of 4th class loose climbing to reach
the ridge crest. The summit view was really special, because it took in the
Ademello-Presanella Group two ridges away to the west. Broad glaciers and ridges
decorated the massif. "Wow, gotta go there," I thought.

As I marched down, I managed to short cut many of the long road switchbacks,
which pleased me. 4600 feet elevation gain/loss. Quarts of water sweated:
12,000.
